

Studies in Continental Thought
EDITOR
JOHN SALLIS
CONSULTING EDITORS
Robert Bernasconi William 1. McBride
Rudolf Bernet J. N. Mohanty
John D. Caputo Mary Rawlinson
David Carr Tom Rockmore
Edward S. Casey Calvin O. Schrag
Hubert 1. Dreyfus tReiner Schiirmann
Don Ihde Charles E. Scott
David Farrell Krell Thomas Sheehan
Lenore Langsdorf Robert Sokolowski
Alphonso Lingis Bruce W. Wilshire
David Wood
Martin Heidegger
Contributions to
Philosophy
(Of the Event)
Translated by
Richard Rojcewicz and
Daniela Vallega-Neu
Indiana University Press
Bloomington and Indianapolis
This book is a publication of
Indiana University Press
601 North Morton Street
Bloomington, Indiana 47404-3797 USA
iupress.indiana.edu
Telephone orders 800-842-6796
Fax orders 812-855-7931
Published in German as Martin Heidegger, Gesamtausgabe 65: Beitriige zur Philosophie
(V om Ereignis), edited by Friedrich-Wilhelm von Herrmann
© 1989 by Vittorio Klostermann, Frankfurt am Main
English translation © 2012 by Indiana University Press
All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or by any information
storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
The Association of American University Presses' Resolution on Permissions
constitutes the only exception to this prohibition.
o The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of the
American National Standard for Information Sciences-Permanence of Paper for
Printed Library Materials, ANSI 239.48-1992.
Manufactured in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Heidegger, Martin, 1889-1976
[Beitrage zur Philosophie. English]
Contributions to philosophy (of the event) I Martin Heidegger ;
translated by Richard Rojcewicz and Daniela Vallega-Neu.
pages cm. - (Studies in Continental thought)
Translated from German.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-0-253-00113-9 (cloth: alk. paper) - ISBN 978-0-253-00127-6
(electronic book) 1. Philosophy. I Rojcewicz, Richard, translator. II. Vallega-Neu,
Daniela, [date], translator. III. Title. IV. Title: Of the event.
B3279.H48B44513 2012
193-dc23
1 2 3 4 5 17 16 15 14 13 12
2011047311
CONTENTS
Translators' Introduction xv
1. PROSPECT
The official title: Contributions to Philosophy and the
essential rubric: Of the Event 5
1. These "contributions" question along a way ... 6
2. The saying of the event as the first answering of the
question of being 8
3. Of the event 10
4. Of the event 10
5. For the few-For the rare 11
6. The basic disposition 18
7. Of the event 20
8. Of the event 24
9. Conspectus 25
10. Of the event 25
11. Event-Dasein-the human being 26
12. Event and history 27
13. Restraint 28
14. Philosophy and worldview 30
15. Philosophy as "philosophy of a people" 34
16. Philosophy 35
17. The necessity of philosophy 37
18. The powerlessness of thinking 38
19. Philosophy (On the question: Who are we?) 39
20. The beginning and inceptual thinking 44
21. Inceptual thinking (Projection) 45
22. Inceptual thinking 46
23. Inceptual thinking. Why thinking out of the beginning? 46
24. The aberrant demand placed on inceptual thinking 48
25. Historicality and being 49
26. Philosophy as knowledge 50
27. Inceptual thinking (Concept) 51
28. The immeasurableness of inceptual thinking
as finite thinking 52
29. Inceptual thinking (The question of the essence) 53
30. Inceptual thinking (as meditation) 53
31. The style of inceptual thinking 55
vi Contents
32, The event, A decisive gaze after the carrying out
of the resonating and the interplay 56
33, The question of beyng 58
34, The event and the question of being 58
35, The event 62
36, Language and the inventive thinking of beyng 62
37, Beyng and its bearing silence (Sigetics) 62
38. Bearing silence 63
39. The event 64
40. The work of thought in the age of transition 66
4l. Every saying of beyng is couched in words and namings 66
42. From "Being and Time" to "Event" 67
43. Beyng and decision 69
44. "Decisions" 72
45. The "decision" 76
46. The decision (Preliminary concept) 79
47. The essence of the decision: being or nonbeing 80
48. In what sense the decision belongs to beyng itself 81
49. Why must decisions take place? 81
II. THE RESONATING
50. Resonating 85
5l. The resonating 86
52. The abandonment by being 87
53. Plight 89
54. The abandonment by being 90
55. Resonating 90
56. The continuance of the abandonment by being in the
hidden mode of the forgotten ness of being 92
57. The history of beyng and the abandonment by being 95
58. The three ways the abandonment by being cloaks itself:
What they are and how they appear 95
59. Bewitchery and the era of complete unquestionableness 98
60. Whence the lack of a sense of plight as the greatest plight? 99
6l. Machination 99
62. The disguising of the abandonment by being through
machination and "lived experience," a disguising
which belongs to that abandonment itself 101
63. Lived experience 102
64. Machination 102
Contents vii
65. The distorted essence of beyng 103
66. Machination and lived experience 103
67. Machination and lived experience 104
68. Machination and lived experience 105
69. Lived experience and "anthropology" 106
70. The gigantic 106
71. The gigantic 108
72. Nihilism 109
73. "Science" and the abandonment by being III
74. "Total mobilization" as a consequence of the
original abandonment by being 112
75. Concerning the meditation on science 113
76. Propositions about "science" 113
77. Experiri-experientia-experimentum-
"experimentation"-E\lTCElp{a-experience-test 124
78. Experiri (E\lTCElpla)-"experiencing" 125
79. Exact science and experimentation 128
80. Experiri-experientia-experimentum-"experimentation" 128
III. THE INTERPLAY
81. Interplay 133
82. Interplay 133
83. Being, according to all metaphysics 134
84. Beings 134
85. The originary appropriation of the first beginning
means gaining a foothold in the other beginning 135
86. What the history of metaphysics provides and thus passes on
as still implicit and as unknown to this history 137
87. The history of the first beginning
(the history of metaphysics) 137
88. The "historical" lecture courses belong in the
sphere of this task 138
89. The transition to the other beginning 139
90. From the first to the other beginning. Negation 140
91. From the first to the other beginning 141
92. The confrontation between the first and the
other beginning 146
93. The great philosophies 147
94. The confrontation of the other beginning 147
95. The first beginning 148
96. The inceptual interpretation of beings as <j>uou; 149
viii Contents
97. <p6(n~ (T£XVfj) 149
9S. The projection of beingness upon constant presence 150
99. "Being" and "becoming" in inceptual thinking 151
100. The first beginning 153
10 I. From early on, the great simplicity ... 155
102. Thinking: The guideline of the guiding question of
Western philosophy 155
103. On the concept of German Idealism 15S
104. German Idealism 159
105. Holder lin-Kierkegaard -Nietzsche 160
106. The decision with regard to all "ontology" in carrying out
the confrontation between the first and the other beginning 160
107. The answer to the guiding question and the form of
traditional metaphysics 161
lOS. The basic metaphysical positions within the history
of the guiding question and their respective
interpretations of time-space 162
109. 'Jo£a 163
1l0. The io£a, Platonism, and idealism 163
Ill. The "apriori" and <p6<Jt~ 174
Il2. The "apriori" 174
113. 'Jo£a and QU<Jta 175
Il4. On Nietzsche's basic metaphysical position 175
IV. THE LEAP
Il5. The disposition guiding the leap 179
Il6. The history of being 179
Il7. The leap ISO
US. The leap IS2
Il9. The leap is prepared by asking the basic question IS3
120. The leap IS5
121. Beyng and beings IS7
122. The leap (the thrown projection) 188
123. Beyng 189
124. The leap 190
125. Beyng and time 190
126. Beyng, beings, and the gods 191
127. The fissure 192
128. Beyng and the human being 193
129. Nothingness 193
Contents ix
[30. The "essence" of beyng 195
13 I. The excess in the essence of beyng (self-concealment) 196
132. Beyng and beings 197
133. The essence of beyng 198
134. The relation between Da-sein and beyng 199
135. The essential occurrence of beyng as event
(the relation between Da-sein and beyng) 200
136. Beyng 200
137. Beyng 203
138. The truth of beyng and the understanding of being 204
139. The essential occurrence of beyng: Truth and time-space 204
140. The essential occurrence of beyng 205
14l. The essence of beyng 206
142. The essence of beyng 206
143. Beyng 207
144. Beyng and the original strife (beyng or non-beyng
in the essence of beyng itself) 208
145. Beyng and nothingness 209
146. Beyng and non-beyng 210
147. The essential occurrence of beyng (the finitude of beyng) 211
148. Beings are 211
149. The beingness of beings distinguished according to
rl earlv and Orl Earlv 212
150. The origin of the distinction between what a being is
and the fact that it is 214
15I. Being and beings 214
152. The levels of beyng 215
153. Life 217
154. "Life" 217
155. Nature and earth 218
156. The fissure 218
157. The fissure and the "modalities" 219
158. The fissure and the "modalities" 221
159. The fissure 221
160. Being-toward-death and being 222
16l. Being-toward-death 222
162. Beyng-toward-death 223
163. Being-toward-death and being 224
164. The essential occurrence of beyng 225
165. Essence as essential occurrence 225
x Contents
166. Essential occurrence and essence 226
167. Entering into the essential occurrence 227
V. THE GROUNDING
a) Da-sein and the projection of being
168. Da-sein and beyng 231
169. Da-sein 231
170. Da-sein 232
17I. Da-sein 232
172. Da-sein and the question of being 233
173. Da-sein 233
174. Da-sein and steadfastness 235
175. Da-sein and beings as a whole 236
176. Da-sein. Clarification of the word 237
177. Being-away 238
178. "Da-sein exists for the sake of itself" 238
179. "Existence" (Being and Time, [German] p. 42) 239
180. Beyng and the understanding of being 239
18I. The leap 240
182. The projection of beyng. The projection as thrown 240
183. The projection upon beyng 240
184. The question of being as the question of the truth of beyng 241
185. What does Da-sein mean? 241
186. Da-sein 242
b) Da-sein
187. The grounding 243
188. The grounding 243
189. Da-sein 244
190. Of Da-sein 245
19I. Da-sein 246
192. Da-sein 247
193. Da-sein and the human being 247
194. The human being and Da-sein 251
195. Da-sein and the human being 252
196. Da-sein and a people 252
197. Da-sein-domain of what is proper-selfhood 252
198. The grounding of Da-sein as a creative grounding 254
199. Transcendence, Da-sein, and beyng 255
Contents xi
Da-sein 255
Da-sein and being-away 256
Da-sein (Being-away) 256
The projection and Da-sein 257
c) The essence of truth
204, The essence of truth 259
lOS, The open 260
206. From aA~ena to Da-sein 261
107. From aA~9Ela to Da-sein 261
208, Truth 262
209. 'AM9na-openness and the clearing of
what is self-concealing 263
10. Concerning the history of the essence of truth 264
111. 'AA~9Ela. The crisis of its history in Plato and Aristotle,
its last glimmering and complete collapse 265
12. Truth as certainty 266
213. What the question of truth is about 267
214. The essence of truth (Openness) 268
215. The essential occurrence of truth 270
216. The posing of the question of truth 270
217. The essence of truth 270
218. The indication of the essential occurrence of truth 272
219. The conjuncture of the question of truth 272
220. The question of truth 273
221. Truth as the essential occurrence of beyng 273
222. Truth 274
223. The essence of truth (the distorted essence of truth) 274
224. The essence of truth 275
225. The essence of truth 275
226. 'AA~9na and the clearing of concealment 277
227. On the essence of truth 279
228. The essence of truth is un-truth 281
229. Truth and Da-sein 281
230. Truth and correctness 282
211. How truth, aM9na, becomes correctness 283
232. The question of truth as historical meditation 283
233. Incorporating the interpretation of the cave allegory
(1931-32,1933-34) into the question of truth 284
234. The question of truth (Nietzsche) 285
xii Contents
235. Truth and genuineness 289
236. Truth 290
237. Belief and truth 291
d) Time-space as the abyssal ground
238. Time-space 293
239. Time-space (preparatory deliberation) 294
240. Time and space. Their Hreality" and their Hprovenance" 297
241. Space and time-time-space 297
242. Time-space as the abyssal ground 299
e) The essential occurrence of truth as a sheltering
243. Sheltering 307
244. Truth and sheltering 308
245. Truth and sheltering 309
246. The sheltering of truth in what is true 309
247. The grounding of Da-sein and the paths
to the sheltering of truth 310
VI. THE FUTURE ONES
248. The future ones 313
249. The basic disposition of the future ones 313
250. The future ones 314
251. Da-sein and the essence of a people 316
252. Da-sein and the future ones of the last god 316
VII. THE LAST GOD
253. What is last 321
254. Refusal 321
255. The turning in the event 322
256. The last god 324
VIII. BEYNG
257. Beyng 333
258. Philosophy 333
259. Philosophy 335
260. The gigantic 348
261. Views of beyng 349
262. The Hprojection" of beyng and beyng as projection 352
263. Every projection is a thrown projection 356
264. The projection of beyng and the understanding of being 358
Contents xiii
265. The inventive thinking of beyng 359
266. Beyng and the "ontological difference."
The "differentiation" 366
267. Beyng (Event) 369
268. Beyng (The differentiation) 375
269. Beyng 378
270. The essence of beyng (essential occurrence) 381
27I. Da-sein 383
272. The human being 386
273. History 387
274. Beings and calculation 389
275. Beings 390
276. Beyng and language 391
277. "Metaphysics" and the origin of the work of art 396
278. Origin of the work of art 398
279. But what of the gods? 399
280. The transitional question 400
28I. Language (its origin) 401
Editor's Afterword 403
German-English Glossary 411
English-German Glossary 417
Greek-English Glossary 423
Latin-English Glossary 427
Bibliography 431

Translators' Introduction
This Is a translation of Martin Heidegger's Beitrage zur Philosophie (Vom
Bre(qnis) dating from 1936-38. The German original appeared posthumously
in 1989, with a second edition in 1994.
The book constitutes volume 65 of Heidegger's Gesamtausgabe ("Complete
Edition") and inaugurates the third division of that series: "Unpublished
treatises: addresses-ponderings." At issue in the Contributions
are indeed private ponderings not composed for publication. As
stich, the book displays the kind of literary unevenness that could be
{'xpected when thinkers write for themselves with no didactic intent:
iliong with polished passages also a good number of incomplete sentences,
ellipses, cryptic sections, and at times even loosely organized
lists of keywords. As regards its sense, however, the book is the exact
opposite of a private pondering. Right from the start, Heidegger denies
that these are to be understood as his own personal contributions to
philosophy. Instead, we have here a speaking "of" (understood primarily
in the sense of the subjective genitive) the event (Ereignis). These
ponderings attempt to let themselves be appropriated by the event. Thus
what is here struggling to come to words arises out of a view of thinkIng
that is radically different from the traditional, metaphysical understanding
of thought as the generation of concepts out of the thinker's
own spontaneity. That radical difference accounts for the struggle.
Our aim in translating was to capture in English the effect the original
would have on a native speaker of German. Therefore, we did not
attempt to resolve the grammatical peculiarities, nor have we imposed
on Heidegger's terminology the extraordinary sense which the ordinary
words do eventually assume. In Heidegger's understanding, Contributions
to Philosophy sojourns in the transition to "another beginning"
of thought with respect to metaphysics, "the first beginning." This
other beginning would require a transformation of language. Yet Heidegger
recognizes (d. section 259, p. 340) that transitional thinking
must for some length of time still tread the paths of metaphysics-in
xvi Translators' Introduction
other words, must still avail itself of the language of the first beginning.
For Heidegger, the decisive junctures of the history of philosophy are
marked not by the coining of new terms but by a new sense accruing to
the old terms. Thus our translation aims to invite the reader into the
task of disclosing the new sense and does not presumptuously impose
that sense from the start through idiosyncratic terminological choices.
For example, what "essence" and "event" come to mean in the course
of these ponderings is up to the reader to decide.
The editor of this volume calls it Heidegger's second magnum opus
(after Being and Time). Its importance is unquestionable, but so is its
challenge. The directionality is convoluted, the vocabulary purposefully
archaic, the diction strange, and the style sui generis; language
is here brought to the extremity of its possibilities. Yet our hope is
that the reader of this translation will have the same chance of penetrating
the book as would someone who takes up the original. For
the convenience of those wishing to compare the two versions, the
running heads herein indicate the Gesamtausgabe pagination.
We believe our terminology is intelligible in context, and we have
kept to a minimum our interpolation of German words. At times,
when an important nuance or semantic connection could not be captured,
we have inserted the German terms in brackets. In particular,
the force of the hyphen in Heidegger's terms could often not be captured
by simply hyphenating the corresponding English word, at least
not without indicating the original. In the back of the volume we have
provided extensive German-English and English-German glossaries.
These not only layout our translations of both hyphenated and nonhyphenated
terms, they additionally serve as a sort of index to the
main concepts of the book. To be found at the end are Greek-English
and Latin-English glossaries as well. These include every word used
here in those classical languages. For Greek terms, we have also placed
a translation in the text upon the first occurrence of the word. Furthermore,
the back matter contains a bibliography of all the other
works of Heidegger cited by him in the present volume. This bibliography
indicates published English translations, if extant.
We are indebted to several colleagues and friends who helped us
resolve terminological issues and who offered incisive comments on
delimited portions of the text: John Sallis, Dennis Schmidt, and David
Krell. Bret Davis carefully read a draft of the entire text and suggested
many improvements. Lastly, Daniela Vallega-Neu acknowledges with
gratitude an NEH stipend for the summer of 2008, which allowed her
to make substantial progress on the translation.
Richard Rojcewicz
Daniela Vallega-Neu
Contributions to Philosophy
(Of the Event)

What was held back in long hesitation
Is herewith made fast in an indicative way
As the straightedge of a configuration.

1. PROSPECTl
1. Cf. UberZegungen II, IV and V, VI.

The official title: Contributions to Philosophy
and
the essential rubric: Of the Event
The official title must by necessity now sound dull, ordinary, and
empty and will make it seem that at issue here are "scholarly" "contributions"
to the "advancement" of philosophy.
Philosophy can be officially announced no other way, since all essential
titles have become impossible on account of the exhaustion of
every basic word and the destruction of the genuine relation to
words.
The official title, however, is also in accord with the "matter at
issue" to the extent that, in the age of transition from metaphysics to
the thinking of beyng2 in its historicality, no more can be ventured
than an attempt at a thinking which would arise out of a more originary
basic position within the question of the truth of beyng. Yet
even the successful attempt must-in conformity with the basic
event of that which is to be thought inventively-keep its distance
from every false claim to be a "work" in the previous style. Future
thinking is a course of thought, on which the hitherto altogether concealed
realm of the essential occurrence of beyng is traversed and so
is first cleared and attained in its most proper character as an event.
The issue is no longer to be "about" something, to present something
objective, but to be appropriated over to the appropriating
event. That is equivalent to an essential transformation of the human
being: from "rational animal" (animal rationale) to Da-sein. The fitting
rubric is therefore Of [von] the Event. That is not to be understood
in the sense of a report on it [davon], about it. Instead, it means that
a belonging to beyng and to the word "of" beyng, a belonging in
thinking and saying, is something appropriated by [von] the event.
2. Archaic form of "being" to render das Seyn, archaic form of das Sein-Trans.
6 L Prospect [4-5]
1. These "contributions" question along a way . ..
These "contributions" question along a way which is first paved by the
transition to the other beginning, the one Western thought is now entering.
This way brings the transition into the open realm of history
and founds the transition as a possibly very long sojourn. In carrying
out the transition, the other beginning of thought always remains
something only surmised, though indeed something already decided.
Accordingly, these "contributions," although already and exclusively
a speaking of the essence of beyng, i.e., of the "appropriating
event," are not yet able to join the free conjuncture of the truth of
beyng out of beyng itself. If this articulation once succeeds, then that
essence of beyng, in its trembling, will determine the structure of
the work of thought. This trembling will then strengthen into the
power of the released mildness of an intimacy proper to that divinization
of the god of gods from which occurs the assignment of Da-sein to
beyng as the grounding of the truth of beyng.
Nevertheless, here already the thoughtful speaking of a philosophy
within the other beginning must be attempted, in the manner of
a preliminary exercise. The issue is then neither to describe nor to
explain, neither to promulgate nor to teach. Here the speaking is not
something over and against what is to be said but is this latter itself
as the essential occurrence of beyng.
This speaking gathers beyng to a first resonating of its essence and
yet sounds forth itself only from this essence.
Spoken in the preliminary exercise is a questioning that is not the
purposive act of an individual nor something delimited and calculated
by a community. Prior to all that, it is the passing on of an intimation that
comes from, and remains assigned to, what is most question-worthy.
Detachment from every "personal" domain will succeed only out
of the intimacy of the earliest belonging. No grounding is granted
unless such a detachment would vouch for it.
The age of the "systems" has past. The age that would elaborate the
essential form of beings from out of the truth of beyng has not yet
come. In the interim, in the transition to the other beginning, philosophy
needs to have accomplished something essential: the projection,
i.e., the grounding and opening up, of the temporal-spatial playing
field of the truth of beyng. How is this unique accomplishment to be
brought about? There is no precedent for it and no foothold. Mere variations
on previous notions, even if these variations arise with the help
of the greatest possible intermixing of historiologically familiar modes
§l [5-6] 7
thought, will get us nowhere. Furthermore, all worldview theories
stand completely outside of philosophy, for they can exist only by denying
that beyng is worthy of question. By honoring this questionworthiness,
philosophy possesses its own dignity, one that cannot be
derived from elsewhere and cannot be calculated. All decisions regarding
philosophy's dealings arise from the preservation of this dignity
and as preservations of this dignity. In the realm of what is most
worthy of question, however, these dealings can only constitute a
unique questioning. If in any of its hidden ages, then it is in the transition
to the other beginning that philosophy, in the clarity of its
knowledge, must come to a decision regarding its own essence.
The "other beginning" of thought is so named not because it is
simply different in form from all other previous philosophies but because
it must be the only other beginning arising in relation to the
one and only first beginning. From this assignment of the first and
the other beginning to each other, the character of thoughtful meditation
in the transition is also already determined. Transitional thinking
accomplishes the grounding projection of the truth of beyng as
historical meditation. History is thereby not the object and sphere of a
spectating but is that which first awakens and brings about thoughtful
questioning as the site of the decisions of history. In the transition,
thought places in dialogue the first having-been of the beyng of
truth and the extreme to-come of the truth of beyng and in that dialogue
brings to words the hitherto un interrogated essence of beyng.
In the knowledge belonging to transitional thinking, the first beginning
remains decisive as the first and yet is indeed overcome as a
beginning. For this thinking, the clearest respect paid to the first
beginning (a respect which first discloses this beginning in its
uniqueness) must be accompanied by the disrespect of the renunciation
implicit in another questioning and speaking.
The outline of these "contributions" toward the preparation of the
transition is taken from the still-unmastered ground-plan of the historicality
of the transition itself:
the resonating
the interplay
the leap
the grounding
the future ones
the last god
This outline is not a series of various considerations on sundry objects;
nor is it a step-by-step ascent from the low to the high. It is a
preliminary sketch of the temporal-spatial playing field which the
history of the transition first creates as its own realm in order to decide,
8 1. Prospect [6-7 ]
according to its own law, about the futureless ones, i.e., those who are
always only "eternal," and about the future ones, i.e., those who occur
only once.
2. The saying of the event as the first answering
of the question of being
The question of being is the question of the truth of beyng. When
grasped and worked out historically, it becomes the basic question, versus
the previous question of philosophy, the question of beings (the
guiding question).
The question of the truth of beyng is, to be sure, a penetration into
something well guarded, since the truth of beyng-in thinking, this
truth is the steadfast knowledge of how beyng occurs essentially-is
perhaps not even an entitlement of the god~ but, instead, belongs
uniquely to the abyss of that dispensation to which even the gods are
subject.
And yet: if beings are, then beyng must occur essentially. But how
does beyng occur essentially? And are there beings? Out of what else
does thinking decide here, if not out of the truth of beyng? Accordingly,
beyng can no longer be thought on the basis of beings but must
be inventively thought from itself.
At times, those who ground the abyss must be consumed in the
fire of that which is well guarded, so that Da-sein might be possible
for humans and constancy within beings might thus be saved, and
also so that beings themselves might undergo restoration in the open
realm of the strife between earth and world.
In other words, beings are brought into their constancy through the
downgoing of those who ground the truth of beyng. Beyng itself requires
this. It needs those who go down and has already appropriated
them, assigned them to itself, wherever beings appear. That is the
essential occurrence of beyng itself; we call this essential occurrence
the event. Measureless is the richness of the turning relation of beyng
to the Da-sein it appropriates, incalculable the fullness of the appropriation.
Yet only very little speaking "of the event" is possible here
in this thought that is making a beginning. What is said is questioned
and thought in the "interplay" between the first and the other
beginning, out of the "resonating" of beyng in the plight of the abandonment
by being, for the "leap" into beyng, toward the "grounding"
of its truth, as preparing the "future ones" of "the last god."
This thoughtful speaking is a directive. Without being an order, it
indicates that the free domain of the sheltering in beings of the truth
§2 [7-9] 9
of is necessary. Such never allows itself to be made
nto a doctrine. It completely withdraws itself from the fortuitiveness
of opinion. But it does issue a directive to the few and to their knowledge,
when at issue is the retrieval of humans from the intractability
of nonbeings into the tractability of the restrained creation of the site
destined for the passing by of the last god.
If the essential occurrence of beyng constitutes the event, however,
then how near is the danger that beyng might refuse, and must refuse,
to appropriate because humans have become powerless to be Da-sein on
account of the untrammeled force of their frenzy for the gigantic, which
latter, under the semblance of "greatness," has overpowered them.
Yet if the event becomes a withholding and a refusal, is that only
the withdrawal of beyng and the surrendering of beings into nonbeings,
or can the refusal (the negativity of beyng) become in the extreme
the most remote appropriation-assuming that humans grasp
this event and that shock and diffidence place them back in the basic
disposition of restraint and thereby already propel them out into
Da-sein?
To know the essence of beyng as the event means not only to be
aware of the danger of refusal, but also to be prepared for overcoming
it. Far in advance of that, what remains first here can only be: to
place beyng in question.
No one understands what ''1'' am here thinking: to let Da-sein arise
out of the truth of beyng (i.e., out of the essential occurrence of truth)
in order to ground therein beings as a whole and as such and, in the
midst of them, to ground the human being.
No one grasps this, because others all try to explain "my" attempt
merely historiologically by appealing to the past which they believe
I hey understand because it apparently already lies behind them.
As for those who will some day grasp this, they do not need "my"
attempt, for they must have paved their own way to it. They must be
ilhle to think what is attempted here in such a manner that they believe
it comes to them from afar and is nevertheless what is most
proper to them, to which they are appropriated as ones who are
needed and who therefore have neither the desire nor the opportunity
to focus on "themselves."
Through a simple thrust of essential thought, the happening of the
truth of beyng must be transposed from the first beginning to the
other one, such that in the interplay the wholly other song of beyng
resounds.
And therefore what is in effect here throughout is history, which
denies itself to historiology, for history does not simply let the past
appear but, instead, in all things thrusts over into the future.
10 I. Prospect [9-10]
3. Of the event
The resonating
The interplay
The leap
The grounding
The future ones
The last god
The resonating of beyng in its refusal.
The interplay of the questioning of beyng. The interplay commences
with the first beginning playing over to the other beginning,
in order to bring the latter into play such that out of this II?-utual
interplay, the preparation for the leap develops.
The leap into beyng. The leap leaps into the abyss of the fissure and
so for the first time attains the necessity of grounding Da-sein, which
is assigned out of beyng.
The grounding of truth as truth of beyng: (Da-sein).
4. Of the event
Here everything is placed in relation to the unique question of the
truth of beyng, i.e., in relation to questioning. In order for this attempt
to become an actual impetus, the wonder of questioning must be experienced
in carrying it out and must be made effective as an awakening
and strengthening of the power to question.
Questioning arouses immediately the suspicion of amounting to an
empty, obstinate attachment to the uncertain, undecided, and undecidable.
Questioning appears as a backtracking of "knowledge" into
idle meditation. It seems to be narrowing and hampering, if not even
negating.
Nevertheless: in questioning reside the tempestuous advance that
says "yes" to what has not been mastered and the broadening out
into ponderable, yet unexplored, realms. What reigns here is a selfsurpassing
into something above ourselves. To question is to be liberated
for what, while remaining concealed, is compelling.
Questioning is, in its seldom-experienced essence, so utterly different
from the way it appears in its distorted essence that it often extracts
§4 [10-11] II
last remnant of heart from those who are already disheartened.
BUt they then also do not belong in the invisible ring enclosing those
whose questioning is answered by the intimation of beyng.
The question of the truth of beyng cannot be calculated in terms
of what has preceded it. Furthermore, this questioning must be carried
out in an originary way if it is supposed to prepare the beginning
of another history. As unavoidable as is the confrontation with
the first beginning of the history of thought, just as certainly must
questioning forget everything round about itself and merely think
jlbout its own plight.
History comes to be only in the immediate leap over the "historiological."
The question of "meaning," i.e., according to the elucidations in
Being and Time [Sein und Zeit], the question of the grounding of a proj<'
cted domain, or, in short, the question of the truth of beyng, is and
remains my question and is my unique question, for at issue in it is
Indeed what is most unique. In the age that is completely questionless
about everything, it is enough to begin by asking the question of all
questions.
In the age of infinite wants stemming from the concealed plight of
a lack of a sense of plight, this question must necessarily seem the most
useless idle talk, of the kind that has been opportunely dismissed
already.
All the same, the task remains: the retrieval of beings out of the truth
ofbeyng.
The question of the "meaning of beyng" is the question of all questions.
As we unfold this question, we determine the essence of what
is here called "meaning," that within which the question as meditat
ion persists, that which it opens up as a question: the openness for
$elf-concealing, i.e., truth.
The question of being is the leap into beyng, the leap carried out by
lhe human being as the seeker of beyng, i.e., as the thinker who creates.
A seeker of beyng, in the most proper abundance of the power
to seek, is the poet, who "institutes" beyng.
We of today, however, have only the one duty, to prepare this
thinker through the grounding that reaches far ahead, the grounding
of a secure readiness for what is most worthy of question.
5. For the few-For the rare
For the few, who from time to time question again, i.e., newly put the
essence of truth up for decision.
12 L Prospect [11-13]
For the rare, who are endowed with the great courage required for
solitude, in order to think the nobility of beyng and to speak of its
uniqueness.
Thinking in the other beginning is in a unique way originarily historical:
the compliant disposing of the essential occurrence of beyng.
A projection of the essential occurrence of beyng as the event must
be ventured, because we do not know that to which our history is assigned.
Would that we might radically experience the essential occurrence
of this unknown assignment in its self-concealing.
Let us indeed want to develop this knowledge such that what is
unknown and given to us as a task might leave our will in solitude
and thereby compel the steadfastness of Da-sein to the highest restraint
in the face of what is self-concealing.
Nearness to the last god is reticence, which must be set into work
and word in the style of restraint.
To be in the nearness of the god-even if this nearness is the most
remote remoteness of the undecidability regarding the absconding or
advent of the gods-cannot be calculated in terms of "good fortune"
or "misfortune." The constancy of beyng itself bears in itself its own
measure, if a measure is still needed at all.
To which of us today, however, is this constancy granted? We
scarcely manage to be prepared for its necessity or even to point to this
preparedness as the inception of another course of history.
Reversions to the all-too-familiar modes of thought and claims of
metaphysics will still be disturbing for a long time and will obscure the
clarity of the way and the determinateness of the speaking. Nevertheless,
the historical moment of the transition must be carried out in the
knowledge that all metaphysics (founded on the leading question:
what are beings?) remained incapable of transposing the human being
into the basic relations to beings. And how should it be capable of that?
Even the will to do so finds no hearing as long as the truth of beyng
and the uniqueness of beyng have not become needful. Yet how is
thinking supposed to succeed in what was previously denied the poet
(HOlderlin)? Or must we merely rid his path and his work of the debris
covering them and direct them toward the truth of beyng? Are we
equipped to do that?
The truth of beyng becomes needful only through the questioners.
They are the genuine believers, because they-by opening up the
essence of truth-adhere to the ground (d. The grounding, 237. Belief
and truth).
The questioners-alone and without resorting to any magic charmplace
the new and highest degree of steadfastness in the middle of
beyng, in the essential occurrence of beyng (the event) as the middle.
§5 [13-14] 13
The questioners have broken the habit of curiosity; their seeking
loves the abyss, in which they know the oldest ground.
If a history should be granted us once again, namely, the creative
t::xposure to beings out of a belonging to being, then the destiny is
inescapable: to prepare the time-space of the last decision-whether
and how we experience and ground this belonging. That means: to
ground through thought the knowledge of the event, by way of the
~rounding (as Da-sein) of the essence of truth.
No matter how the decision may turn out regarding history and
lack of history, the questioners, who in thought prepare that decision,
must be; may they all bear the solitude in their greatest hour.
Which saying effects the highest thoughtful reticence? Which
procedure is most likely to bring about reflection on beyng? The saying
of truth; for truth is the "between" for the essential occurrence of
heyng and for the beingness of beings. This "between" grounds the
beingness of beings in beyng.
Yet beyng is not something "earlier"-existing in itself, for itself.
Instead, the event is the temporal-spatial simultaneity for beyng and
beings (d. The interplay, 112. The "apriori").
In philosophy, propositions are never subject to proof. This is so
not only because there are no highest propositions, from which others
could be derived, but because here "propositions" are not at all what
is true, nor are propositions simply that about which they speak. All
"proving" presupposes that those who understand, as they come to
stand before the represented content of the proposition, remain the
same, unaltered in following the representational nexus that bears
the proof. And only the "result" of the course of the proof can require
a changed mode of representation or, rather, require the representing
of something previously unheeded.
In philosophical knowledge, on the contrary, the very first step
sets in motion a transformation of the one who understands, and
this not in the moral-"existentiell" sense, but rather with respect to
Da-sein. In other words, the relation to beyng and, ever prior to that,
the relation to the truth of beyng are transformed in the mode of the
transposition into Da-sein itself. Because, in philosophical knowledge,
in each case everything is transformed at once-the being of
humans into its standing in the truth, the truth itself, and thereby
the relation to beyng-and because, accordingly, an immediate representation
of something objectively present is never possible, philosophical
thinking will always seem strange.
Especially in the other beginning, the leap into the "between" must
be carried out instantly-in pursuit of the question of the truth of
beyng. The "between" of Da-sein overcomes the XWP10"JlO<; ["separation"]
14 I. Prospect [14-15]
not by slinging a bridge between beyng (beingness) and beings as if
they were two objectively present riverbanks but by transforming together,
into their simultaneity, both beyng and beings. The leap into
the "between" is what first reaches and opens Da-sein and does not
occupy a ready-made standpoint.
The basic disposition of thinking in the other beginning oscillates within
dispositions which can only be named distantly as
shock
restraint (d. Prospect, 13. Restraint)
} presentiment
diffidence (d. Prospect, 6. The basic disposition).
The inner relation among these will be experienced only in thinking
through the individual junctures into which the grounding of the
truth of beyng and the grounding of the essential occurrence of truth
must array themselves. The word for the unity of these dispositions is
lacking, and yet it would be necessary to find that word in order to
obviate the facile misunderstanding that here everything is based on a
cowardly weakness. A blustering "heroism" might judge it so.
Shock: it can best be clarified in contrast to the basic disposition of
the first beginning, namely, wonder. Yet the clarification of a disposition
is never a guarantee that it is actually disposing instead of merely
being represented.
To be shocked is to be taken aback, i.e., back from the familiarity
of customary behavior and into the openness of the pressing forth of
what is self-concealing. In this openness, what was hitherto familiar
shows itself as what alienates and also fetters. What is most familiar,
however, and therefore most unknown, is the abandonment by
being. Shock lets us be taken aback by the very fact that beings are
(whereas, previously, beings were to us simply beings), Le., by the
fact that beings are and that being has abandoned and withdrawn
itself from all "beings" and from whatever appeared as a being.
Yet this shock is neither a mere shrinking back nor the bewildered
surrender of the "will." Instead, because in this shock it is precisely the
self-concealing ofbeyng that opens up, and because beings themselves
as well as the relation to them want to be preserved, this shock is
joined from within by its own most proper "will," and that is what is
here called restraint.
Restraint: the pre-disposition of readiness for the refusal as gift (d.
Prospect, 13. Restraint). In restraint, there reigns (though one is still
taken aback) a turn toward the hesitant self-withholding as the essential
occurrence of beyng. Restraint is the center (d. below) for
shock and diffidence. These latter merely characterize with more
§5 [15-17] 15
explicitness what originally belongs to restraint. Restraint determines
the style of inceptuaP thinking in the other beginning.
Diffidence, in accord with what has been said, is not confused here
with shyness or even understood in that direction. Such a view is out
of the question, so much so that diffidence as intended here even
surpasses the "will" of restraint and does this out of the depth of the
ground of the unitary basic disposition. From diffidence in particular
arises the necessity of reticence; the latter is what allows an essential
occurrence of beyng as event and thoroughly disposes every comportment
in the midst of beings and toward beings.
Diffidence is the way of drawing near and remaining near to what
is most remote as such (d. The last god). Yet the most remote, in its
intimations, provided these are held fast in diffidence, becomes the
closest and gathers up into itself all relations of beyng (d. The leap,
115. The disposition guiding the leap).
Yet who is able to let this basic disposition of shocked and diffident
restraint resonate in the essential human being? And how many will
judge that this disposedness through beyng establishes no turning
away from beings? Instead, it establishes the opposite: the opening of
the simplicity and greatness of beings and the originally compelled
necessity of securing in beings the truth of beyng so as to give the historical
human being a goal once again, namely, to become the one who
grounds and preserves the truth of beyng, to be the "there" as the ground
required by the very essence of beyng, or, in other words, to care. That
is what care means, neither a trivial fussing over just anything nor a
renunciation of joy and power but something more original than all
that, because care is uniquely "for the sake of beyng" -not of the beyng
of the human being but of the beyng of beings as a whole.
The directive has often been repeated that "care" is to be thought
only in the originary realm of the question of being and not in terms
of an arbitrary, personally accidental, "worldview," "anthropological"
outlook on the human being. This directive will remain a dead letter
in the future as long as those who merely "write" a "critique" of the
question of being do not experience, and do not want to experience,
anything of the plight of the abandonment by being. For, in the era of
a wretchedly flaunted "optimism," the very terms "care" and "abandonment
by being" already sound "pessimistic." Now that precisely
the dispositions indicated by these names, along with the opposite dispositions,
have become radically impossible in the realm of inceptual
questioning, since they presuppose thinking in terms of values (ayaeov
["good"]) and also presuppose the previous interpretations of beings
3. Anfanglich, adjectival form of der Anfang ("beginning").-Trans
16 1. Prospect [17-18]
and the customary understanding of the human being, the question
then arises: Who might be so thoughtful as to let this at least become
a question?
In inceptual thought, domains of the truth of beyng must be traversed
in order for them then to step back again into concealment
precisely when beings flare up. This taking of byways belongs essentially
to the indirectness of the "effects" of all philosophy.
In philosophy, what is essential, after having had its impact in an
almost concealed way, must step back into inaccessibility (for the
many), because what is essential is unsurpassable and therefore must
withdraw into its making possible the beginning. For, with regard to
beyng and its truth, the beginning must be made ever and again.
All beginnings are in themselves what is unsurpassably complete.
They escape historiology not because they are supra-temporal, eternal,
but rather because they are greater than eternity: the strokes of
time which grant to being the openness of its self-concealment. The
proper grounding of this time-space is called Da-sein.
In restraint (the dispositional center of shock and diffidence, the
fundamental trait of the basic disposition), Da-sein is disposed toward
the stillness of the passing by of the last god. Creating within this basic
disposition of Da-sein, the human being becomes the steward of this
stillness.
In this manner the inceptual meditation of thought necessarily
becomes genuine thought, which is to say, goal-positing thought. Not
just any goal is posited, and not goals in general, but the unique and
therefore single goal of our history. This goal is seeking itself, the
seeking after beyng. Such seeking occurs, and is itself the deepest
discovery, when humans decisively become preservers of the truth of
beyng, stewards of that stillness.
To be seeker, preserver, steward-that is what is meant by care as the
fundamental trait of Dasein. These names for care gather together
the destiny of humans as grasped in terms of their ground, i.e., in
terms of Da-sein. Da-sein, in turning, is appropriated to the event as
the essence of beyng, and only in virtue of this origin as the grounding
of time-space ("primordial temporality") can Da-sein become steadfast
in order to transform the plight of the abandonment by being into
the necessity of creating as the restoring of beings.
By fitting into the juncture of beyng we are at the disposal of the gods.
The seeking is itself the goal. And that means "goals" are still too
much in the forefront and are still placing themselves before beyngand
covering over what is necessary.
If the gods are what is undecided because the open realm of divinization
is still withheld, then what does it mean to be at the disposal of
§5 [18-19] 17
the gods? It means to be at disposal for use in the opening up of this
open realm. The hardest used are those who must first determine in
advance-and make their own the disposition toward-the openness
of this open realm by inventively thinking the essence of truth and
questioning it. At the "disposal of the gods" means to stand far away
and outside-Le., outside the common way of understanding and interpreting
"beings"-and to belong to the most distant ones, those to
whom the absconding of the gods in the gods' farthest withdrawal is
what is closest.
We are already moving, though only transitionally, in another truth
(in the more originarily transformed essence of "true" and "correct").
The grounding of this essence does assuredly require exertions of
thought, as they had to be carried out only at the first beginning of
Western thinking. These exertions are strange to us, because we surmise
nothing of what is required to master that which is simple. People
today, who are hardly worth the mention, even in a turn away from
them, are indeed excluded from the knowledge of the way of thought;
they flee to "new" contents and, by bringing in the "political" and
the "racial:' supply themselves with previously unknown trimmings
for the old gear of academic philosophy.
People glory in the shallow pools of "lived experiences" and are unable
to measure up the broad structure of the space of thought and are
unable to think, in such an opening, the depth and height of beyng.
Whenever persons believe themselves superior to shallow "lived experience,"
what they are invoking is merely an empty sagacity.
Then from what is the education into essential thinking supposed
to come? From an anticipatory thinking of the decisive paths and
from traveling on them.
Who, for instance, joins in traveling the long path of the grounding
of the truth of beyng? Who surmises anything of the necessity of
thinking and questioning, that necessity which requires neither the
crutches of the "whence" nor the supports of the "whither"?
The more necessary is the thoughtful speaking about beyng, the
more unavoidable becomes reticence regarding the truth of beyng in
the course of questioning.
The poet, more easily than others, veils the truth in images and
presents it that way to the gaze for preservation.
Yet how does the thinker shelter the truth of beyng, if not in the
ponderous slowness of the course of questioning steps and their attendant
consequences? How otherwise than inconspicuously, the
way the sower, in an isolated field, under the vast heaven, paces off
the furrows with a heavy, halting, ever-hesitant step while measuring
and configuring, with the scattering gesture of the arm, the
18 1. Prospect [19-21]
hidden space of all growing and ripening? Who can still carry this
out in thinking, as what is most inceptual of the power of thinking
and also as its highest future?
If a thoughtful question is not so simple and so salient that it determines
the will and style of thinking for hundreds of years by assigning
them the highest matter to be thought, then it is best that
that question remain unasked. For if it is merely parroted, the question
only adds wares to the nonstop bazaar offering a bewildering
array of changing "problems" and "reproaches" that concern nothing
and no one.
If measured along such lines, then how fares the question of beyng as
the question of the truth of beyng, a question which in itself, by turning,
asks at the same time about the beyng of truth? How long must be
the way on which the question of truth is merely first encountered?
Whatever in the future can truly be called philosophy must primarily
and exclusively accomplish this: to first find, i.e., to ground,
the place of the thoughtful asking of the newly inceptual question or,
in other words, to ground Da-sein (d. The leap).
The thoughtful question of the truth of beyng is the moment bearing
the transition. This moment is never actually identifiable, and
still less can it be calculated in advance. It itself first marks the time
of the event. The unique simplicity of this transition will never be
graspable historiologically, because public, historiological "history"
has long since passed the transition by, provided the transition can
be shown indirectly to such "history" at all. Thus a long future is
reserved for this moment, supposing that the abandonment of beings
by being is to be broken off once more.
In Da-sein and as Da-sein, beyng ap-propriates truth, and truth itself
reveals beyng as refusal, as that domain of intimations and of
withdrawal-the domain of stillness-in which the advent and absconding
of the last god are first decided. Toward that end, the human
being can accomplish nothing, least of all if to this being is assigned
the preparation for the grounding of Da-sein, indeed assigned in such
a way that this task again radically determines the essence of the
human being.
6. The basic disposition
In the first beginning: wonder.
In the other beginning: foreboding.
Everything would be misinterpreted and would miscarry if we
wanted to prepare the basic disposition with the help of an analysis
§6 [21-22] 19
or even a "definition" and bring it into the free domain of its dispositional
power. Yet now and then we must speak "about" disposition in
order to point the way, but only because psychology has for a long
time restricted the scope of the word "disposition," i.e., only because
the craving for "lived experiences" today, without a meditation on
disposition, would all the more drag astray everything said of it.
All essential thinking demands that its thoughts and utterances be
newly extracted each time, like an ore, out of the basic disposition. If
the basic disposition is lacking, then everything is a forced clatter of
concepts and of the mere shells of words.
Since indeed a misconception about "thinking" has long since dominated
the common opinion regarding "philosophy," the way disposition
is represented and judged can therefore be absolutely nothing
other than a scion of this misinterpretation of thinking (disposition is
weak, erratic, unclear, and dull, versus the acuity, certainty, clarity,
and nimbleness of "thought"). In the best case, disposition might be
tolerated as an embellishment of thinking.
On the other hand, the basic disposition disposes Da-sein and
thereby disposes thinking as a projection of the truth of beyng in word
and concept.
Disposition is the diffusion of the trembling of beyng as event in
Da-sein. Diffusion: not mere vanishment and expiration, but just the
opposite-preservation of the spark in the sense of the clearing of
the "there" according to the full fissure of beyng.
The basic disposition of the other beginning can almost neverand
certainly not in the transition to that beginning-be designated
with one single name. The multiplicity of names, however, does not
negate the simplicity of this basic disposition; it merely points to the
ungraspableness of everything simple. The basic disposition is called
by us: shock, restraint, diffidence, presentiment, foreboding.
Presentiment opens the expanse of the concealment of what is assigned
and perhaps refused.
Presentiment-taken in terms of the basic disposition, versus the
ordinary, calculative understanding of it-does not at all concern
merely the future, merely what is imminent, but instead traverses
and measures up the whole of temporality: the temporal-spatial
playing field of the "there."
Presentiment is in itself the self-grounded holding-open of the
dispositional power; it is the hesitant (yet already ascendant over all
the uncertainty of mere opinion) sheltering of the unconcealment of
the concealed (the refusal) as such.
Presentiment places inceptual steadfastness into Da-sein. Presentiment
is in itself at once shock and exaltation-always assuming that
20 1. Prospect [22-23]
here, as the basic disposition, it attunes and modulates the trembling
of beyng in Da-sein as Da-sein.
Every naming of the basic disposition in a single word fixes on an
erroneous view. Every word is taken again from the tradition. That
the basic disposition of the other beginning must bear multiple
names does not militate against its unity but, rather, confirms its
richness and strangeness.
Every meditation on this basic disposition is always only a cautious
preparation for the attuning intrusion of the basic disposition,
which must remain something radically befalling and fortuitous. In
accord with the essence of disposition, the preparation for such a
befalling intrusion can assuredly consist only in acts of transitional
thought; and these must grow out of genuine knowledge (Le., out of
the preservation of the truth of beyng).
Yet if beyng essentially occurs as refusal, and if this latter itself should
protrude into its clearing and be preserved as refusal, then the preparedness
for the refusal can consist only in renunciation. Here, however, renunciation
is hardly a mere matter of not wanting to have something or
leaving something aside; instead, it takes place as the highest form of
possession, whose height obtains its decisiveness in the frankness of the
enthusiasm for the inconceivable donation of the refusal.
In this decisiveness, the open realm of the transition is sustained
and grounded; this open realm is the abyssal in-between amid the
"no longer" of the first beginning as well as of its history and the "not
yet" of the fulfillment of the other beginning.
In this decisiveness, all of Da-sein's stewardship must have gained
a foothold, to the extent that the human being, as the one who
grounds Da-sein, must become the steward of the stillness of the
passing by of the last god (d. The grounding).
This decisiveness as foreboding, however, is merely the soberness
of the power to suffer on the part of the creative one, in this case the
one who projects the truth of beyng, the truth that opens, to the essential
force of beings, the stillness out of which beyng (as event)
becomes perceptible.
7. Of the event
How remote from us is the god, the god that appoints us ones who
ground and create because the god's essence needs these?
So remote is the god that we are unable to decide whether he is
moving toward or away from us.
§7 [23-24] 21
To think, fully and inventively, this remoteness itself in its essent
al occurrence as the time-space of the highest decision means to
ask about the truth of beyng, about the event itself, from which all
future history arises, provided there will still be history.
This remoteness of the undecidability of the outermost and the
first is what stands in the clearing on behalf of self-concealment and
Is the essential occurrence of truth itself as the truth of beyng.
For what is self-concealing of this clearing, the remoteness of the
undecidability, is no mere objectively present and irrelevant void but
is the essential occurrence of the event as the very essence of the
event (of the hesitant self-withholding which, as belonging, already
appropriates Da-sein) and is the retention of the moment and of the
site of the first decision.
In the essence of the truth of the event, everything true is simultaneously
decided and grounded, beings come to be, and nonbeings
slip into the semblance of beyng. This remoteness is at once the farthest,
and for us the first, nearness to the god but also the plight of
the abandonment by being, which is concealed by the lack of a sense
of pUght evident in the avoidance of meditation today. In the essential
occurrence of the truth of beyng, in the event and as the event,
the last god is hidden.
The long Christianizing of the god and the increasing promulgation
of every attuned relation to beings have, just as obdurately as
hiddenly, undermined the preconditions in virtue of which something
is situated in the remoteness of the undecidability regarding
the absconding or advent of the god, whose essential occurrence
nevertheless is most intimately experienced, and this, to be sure, by
a knowledge that stands in the truth only by being creative. To create-
in the broad sense in which it is intended here-refers to any
sheltering of the truth in beings.
When we hear god and gods spoken of, we think, in accord with
the kind of representing that has long been customary, in that form
which is still indicated most readily by the name "transcendence," a
name that certainly is itself already polysemic. Intended is something
that surpasses objectively present beings, among them also
human beings. Even where particular modes of surpassing and of
what surpasses are denied, this way of thinking can itself not be
denied. In reference to it, we can even readily survey today's
Nworldviews":
l. The transcendent (inaccurately also called "transcendence") is
the God of Christianity.
2. This "transcendence" is denied and the "people" itself-its essence
left rather indeterminate-is put forth as the goal and purpose
22 1. Prospect [25-26]
of all history. This anti-Christian "worldview" is only apparently unChristian,
for in essence it nevertheless agrees with the kind of thinking
that characterizes "liberalism."
3. The transcendent is in the above case an "idea" or "value" or
"meaning," something for which one cannot live or die but which is
supposed to be realized through "culture."
4. Any two of these transcendences are mixed together-Christianity
and ideas of a people, or cultural politics and ideas of a people, or
Christianity and culture-or else all three are mixed in various degrees
of determinateness. This mixed formation is today the average and
dominant "worldview," in which everything is intended but nothing
can any longer come to a decision.
As different as these "worldviews" are, and as fiercely as they battle
one another, whether openly or in a hidden way-provided wandering
around in the undecided may still be called battling-they all
agree from the start, without realizing it or even conSidering it, that
the human being can be taken as already known in essence, as the
being in relation to which and on the basis of which all "transcendence"
is determined, indeed determined as something that is itself
supposed to determine the human being in the first place. This is
made radically impossible, however, because humans are thereby already
fixed in their determinability instead of being determined as
what must be dis-lodged out of a previous fixity so as to be first attuned
toward a determinability.
Yet how are human beings supposed to be dislodged out of their
fixity, to which belongs primarily the domination of those "transcendences"
and of their mixtures? If humans must carry out this dislodging
by relying on their own resources, then is not the presumptuousness
of giving the measure even greater than it is when the
human being is simply put forth as the measure?
Or is it possible that this dislodging could befall humans? It could,
to be sure. And that is the plight of the abandonment by being. This
plight does not first need help but instead must itself first become the
help. Yet this plight must actually be experienced. What if humans
are hardened against it, indeed, as it seems, more obdurately than
ever? Then those who awaken must arrive, those who would be the
last ones to believe they had discovered the plight, because they are
aware of suffering it.
The awakening to this plight is the first dislodging of the human
being into that between where confusion presses on and, in like measure,
the god continues to abscond. This "between," however, is not
a "transcendence" in relation to the human being; it is, on the contrary,
that open realm to which the human being pertains as the one
§7 [26-27] 23
who grounds and preserves inasmuch as this being, qua Da-sein, is
appropriated by beyng itself, which essentially occurs as nothing
other than event.
If, through this dislodging, humans come to stand in the event
and remain steadfast there in the truth of beyng, then they still stand
first only on the verge of the leap to the decisive experience as to
whether in the event the remaining absent or the intrusion of the
god decides for humans or against them.
Only if we appreciate how uniquely necessary being is and how it
nevertheless does not essentially occur as the god himself, only if we
have attuned our essence to these abysses between the human being
and beyng and between beyng and the gods, only then do "presuppositions"
for a "history" start to become actual again. Consequently,
all that matters for thinking is meditation on the "event."
Finally and above all, the "event" can be inventively thought (haled
before inceptual thinking) only if beyng itself is conceived as the "between"
for the passing by of the last god and for Da-sein.
The event consigns [iibereignet] god to the human being by assigning
[zueignet] the human being to god. This consigning assignment is
the appropriating event [Diese iibereignende Zueignung ist Ereignis]; in
it, the truth of beyng is grounded as Da-sein (and the human being is
transformed, set out into the decision of being-there [Da-sein] and
being-away [Weg-sein]), and history takes its other beginning from
beyng. The truth of beyng, however, as the openness of the selfconcealing,
is at the same time transposition into the decision regarding
the remoteness and nearness of the gods and so is preparedness
for the passing by of the last god.
The event is the "between" in regard to both the passing by of the
god and the history of mankind. Yet it is not an irrelevant connecting
field. Instead, the relation to the passing by is the opening-needed
by the god-of the fissure (d. The leap, 157 and 158. The fissure and
the "modalities"), and the relation to humans is the appropriation that
allows to arise the grounding of Da -sein and thus the necessity of
sheltering the truth of beyng in beings as a restoration of beings.
The passing by is not history, history is not the event, and the
event is not the passing by; yet all three (if we may indeed bring
them down to the level of numbers) can be experienced and inventively
thought only in their relations, i.e., out of the appropriating
event itself.
The remoteness of undecidability is of course not a "beyond," but
is what is closest of the still ungrounded "there" of Da-sein, which has
become steadfast in preparation for the refusal as the essential occurrence
of beyng.
24 1. Prospect [27-28]
This that is closest is so close that all unavoidable pursuit of machinations
and of lived experiences must necessarily have passed it by
already and therefore can never be brought back immediately to it.
The event remains the most alienating.
8. Of the evenr
The absconding of the gods must be experienced and endured.
This endurance grounds the most remote closeness to the event.
This event is the truth of beyng.
It is in this truth that the plight of the abandonment by being first
opens up.
Out of this plight the grounding of the truth of being, the grounding
of Da-sein, becomes necessary.
This necessity occurs in the constant decision pervading all historical
humanity: whether the human being in the future belongs to
the truth of being and thus, out of this belonging and for it, shelters
the truth (as what is true) in beings, or whether the onset of the last
human being drives this being away into a distorted animality and
denies to the historical human being the last god.
What if the battle over measures would die away; what if the same
willing no longer willed greatness, i.e., no longer summoned up a
will for the greatest difference in the ways?
If the other beginning is still preparing itself, then this preparation
is concealed as a great transformation. And it is all the more concealed,
the greater the occurrence. The error consists of course in assuming
that an essential overturning, which affects everything from the
ground up, must also be known and grasped immediately, and altogether,
by everyone and must play out in full public view. Only a few
stand always in the brightness of this lightning.
Most have the "good fortune" to find themselves amid objectively
present things and thereby to pursue what is their own by pursuing
what is useful for a whole.
In the other beginning, what is thought in advance is the entirely
other "domain of decision," as it was called, in which the proper historical
beyng of peoples is won or lost.
This being [Sein]-historicality-is never the same in every era. It
now stands on the verge of an essential transformation, inasmuch as
it is given the task of grounding that domain of decision, that nexus
of the event, in virtue of which historical human beings are first
4. Cf. Prospect, 16. Philosophy.
§10 [28-30] 25
brought to themselves. The grounding of this domain requires a surrendering,
but one that is the opposite of self-renunciation. The
grounding can be carried out only by courageously facing the abyss.
This domain (if such a designation is at all adequate here) is Da-sein,
that "between" which in first grounding itself sets the human being
and god apart, and toward each other, and appropriates each to the
other. What opens up in the grounding of Da-sein is the event. Intended
thereby is not an "over and against," something intuitable
and an "idea," but rather a beckoning hither, and an abiding thither,
in the open realm of the "there," which is precisely the clearingconcealing
fulcrum of this turning.
This turning acquires its truth only if it is carried out as the strife
between earth and world, such that what is true is sheltered in beIngs.
Only the history grounded in Da-sein possesses the guarantee
of belonging to the truth of being.
9. Conspectus
Beyng as event-hesitant denial as (refusal). Ripeness: fruit and gift.
The negative in beyng; and the oscillation; in strife (beyng or nonbeing
[Nichtsein] ).
Beyng essentially occurs in the truth: clearing for self-concealment.
Truth as the essence of grounding: ground-that in which something
is grounded (not the "from which" as cause).
The grounding grounds as abyss: the plight as the open realm of
self-concealment (not the "void," but abyssal undepletion).
The abyss as the time-space.
The time-space-the site of the moment of the strife (beyng or
nonbeing).
The strife as the strife of earth and world, because truth of beyng
only in the sheltering, and this latter as the grounding "between" in
beings. Sundering of earth and world.
The paths and modes of sheltering: beings.
ZO. Of the event
Beyng essentially occurs as the event.
The essential occurrence has its middle and its expanse in the
turning. The carrying out of the strife and of the encounter.
The essential occurrence is secured and sheltered in the truth.
Truth happens as clearing-concealing.
26 I. [30-31]
The basic framework of this happening is the time-space arising
from it.
The time-space is what juts out for measuring the fissure of beyng.
As the juncture of truth, time-space is originally the site of the
moment of the event.
The site of the moment essentially occurs out of the event as the
strife of earth and world.
The playing out of the strife is Da-sein.
Da-sein happens in the modes in which truth is sheltered out of
the securing of the cleared-concealed event.
The sheltering of truth allows what is true to come into the open,
and into the distorted, as a being.
Only in that way do beings stand in beyng.
Beings are. Beyng essentially occurs.
Beyng (as event) needs beings so that it might essentially occur. Beings
do not need beyng in that way. Beings can still "be" in the abandonment
by being; under the domination of this abandonment, the immediate
graspability, usability, and serviceability of every sort (e.g., everything
must serve the people) obviously constitute what is a being and what is not.
This apparent autonomy of beings in relation 10 beyng, as if the latter
were merely a supplement of "abstract," representational thought,
is no actual priority, however; it is only a sign of the entitlement to a
blind decline.
The "actual" beings, conceived in terms of the truth of beyng, are
nonbeings under the dominance of the distorted essence of semblance'
the origin of which remains veiled.
As the grounding of the playing out of the strife into that which is
opened up in this strife, Da-sein is humanly endured and sustained in
the steadfastness that withstands the "there" and belongs to the event.
Thinking of beyng as event is inceptual thinking, which prepares
the other beginning by confronting the first one.
The first beginning thinks beyng as presence out of the presencing
that constitutes the first lighting up of one form of the essential occurrence
of beyng.
11. Event-Dasein-the human beingS
1. Event: the sure light of the essential occurrence of beyng in the
most outer horizon of the most inner plight of the historical
human being.
5. Cf. The grounding.
§12 [31-32] 27
2. Da-sein: the centrally open and thus concealing "between," between
the advent and absconding of the gods on the one hand,
and, on the other hand, humans as rooted in this "between."
3. Da-sein has its origin in the event and in the turning of the
event.
4. Therefore Da-sein is to be grounded only as, and in, the truth of
beyng.
5. The grounding-not creating-is, from the side of humans (d.
the single ones, the few ... ), a matter of letting the ground be.
Thereby humans once again come to themselves and win back
selfhood.
6. The grounded ground is at once abyss [Abgrund] for the fissure of
beyng and distorted ground [Ungrund] for the abandonment of
beings by being.
7. The basic disposition of the grounding is restraint (q.v.).
8. Restraint is the preeminent, momentary relation to the event as
called through the call of the event.
9. Da-sein is the basic happening of the history to come. This happening
arises from the event and becomes a possible site of the
moment for the decision concerning humans-their history or
non-history (as the transition of history into decline).
10. The event and Da-sein in their essence-i.e., in their belonging as
grounding of history-are still fully concealed and will be strange
for a long time. The bridges are lacking; the leaps have not yet been
carried out. Still missing is the depth of a meditation and of an
experience of truth which would be capable of those bridges and
leaps: the power of the crucial decision (q.v.). On the other hand,
what are numerous on the way are merely opportunities and
means for misinterpretation, because we even lack the knowledge
of what took place in the first beginning.
12. Event and history
History is not taken here as one domain of beings among other domains;
instead, it exclusively has in view the essential occurrence of
beyng itself. Thus already in Being and Time the historicality of Da-sein
is to be understood only in terms of the fundamental ontology pursued
there and not as a contribution to any extant philosophy of history.
The event of appropriation is original history itself, which could
suggest that here the essence of beyng is grasped altogether "historically."
To be sure, "historically" indeed, yet not in the adoption of
some concept of history; rather, historically because now the essence
28 L Prospect [32-34J
of beyng no longer only means presence but, rather, means the full
essential occurrence of the temporal-spatial abyss and thus of truth.
In unity with this, knowledge of the uniqueness of beyng arises. Yet
"nature" is not somehow disregarded thereby; instead, it is transformed
just as originally. This original concept of history first grants
us the domain in which it is shown why and how history is "more"
than action and will. "Destiny" also belongs to history and does not
exhaust the essence of history.
The way to the essence of history, understood out of the essential
occurrence of beyng itself, is prepared in "fundamental ontology"
through the grounding of historicality in temporality. That meansin
the sense of the sole guiding question (the "question of being") in
Being and Time-time, as time-space, takes back into itself the essence
of history. Yet insofar as time-space is the abyss of the ground-Le.,
the abyss of the truth of being-there lies in the interpretation of
historicality in Being and Time a directedness to the essence of being
itself, the questioning of which is the only endeavor of that book.
And such questioning amounts to neither a theory of history nor a
philosophy of history.
13. Restrainf'
is the style of inceptual thinking only because it must become the
style of future humanity grounded in Da-sein, i.e., only because it
bears this grounding and is its pervasive disposition.
Restraint, as style: the self-certainty of the grounding measure
and of the sustained wrath of Da-sein. It determines and disposes the
style, because it is the basic disposition.
Disposition (d. the lecture course on H6lderlin7 ) is meant here in
the sense of steadfastness: the unity of the carrying out of all captivation
[Beriickung] and of the projecting and carrying in of all transporting
[Entriickung], and it is the enduring and the enactment of the
truth of being. Every other external and "psychological" representation
of "disposition" is to be avoided here. Thus disposition is never
merely the modality which accompanies, illuminates, and shades
all-supposedly already fixed-human behavior. Instead, it is first
through disposition that the extent of the transporting of Dasein is
6. Cf. above: 5. For the feW-For the rare, p. 13ff.; d. below: The grounding, 193.
Da-sein and the human being.
7. Holderlins Hymnen "Germanien" und "Der Rhein," winter semester 1934-35,
(GA39).
§13 [34-35] 29
measured and that to Dasein is assigned the simplicity of the captivation,
provided at issue here is restraint as the basic disposition.
It is the grounding, basic disposition because it disposes the fath-
0ming of the ground of Da-sein, i.e., the fathoming of the event, and
thereby disposes the grounding of Da-sein.
Restraint is the strongest and at the same time most delicate preparedness
of Dasein for the appropriation, for being thrown into a
senuine standing within the truth of the turning in the event (d. The
last god). The dominion of the last god befalls restraint alone; restraint
creates for this dominion and for the last god the great stillness.
Restraint disposes each grounding moment of a sheltering of truth
In the coming Dasein of the human being. This history that is grounded
In Da-sein is the concealed history of the great stillness. Only in such
history can a people still be.
This restraint alone can gather humans and human assemblies to
themselves, i.e., into the destiny of their assignment: the enduring of
the last god.
Is a history still destined us in the future, something that is comp
etely different from what now seems to be taken as history: the
dreary hunt for self-devouring incidents which allow themselves to
be seized, fleetingly, only by means of the loudest clamor?
If a history-i.e., a style of Da-sein-is still to be bestowed on us,
then this can only be the concealed history of the great stillness, in which
and as which the dominion of the last god opens beings and configures
them.
Therefore the great stillness must first come over the world for the
earth. This stillness arises only out of keeping silent. And this bringIng
into silence grows only out of restraint. The latter, as the basic
disposition, pervasively disposes the intimacy of the strife between
world and earth and thereby also disposes the striving endurance of
the incursion of the appropriation.
Da-sein, as the sustaining of this strife, has its essence in the sheltering
of the truth of beyng, i.e., in sheltering, within beings, the last
god (d. The grounding).
Restraint and care
Restraint is the ground of care. The restraint of Da-sein first grounds
care as the steadfastness that withstands the "there," but care-it
must be said ever and again-does not mean melancholy, preoccupation,
or tormenting worry over something or other. All that is simply
the distorted essence of care insofar as additionally it is placed into
another misunderstanding according to which care is one "disposition"
or "attitude" among others.
30 1. Prospect [35-36]
In the expression, "He will care for keeping things in order" -he
will take care-something of the essence of care comes to light: anticipatory
decidedness. Yet, at the same time, care is not a mere attitude of
will and cannot at all be reckoned up out of the faculties of the soul.
Care, as the enduring of Da -sein, is an anticipatory decidedness for
the truth of beyng and is as well an adherence in the "there," an adherence
which carries out what is assigned. The ground of this "as
well" is the restraint of Dasein. This restraint disposes only as appropriated
belonging to the truth of being.
Restraint as the origin of stillness and as law of gathering. The gathering
into the stillness and the sheltering of truth. Sheltering
and unfolding of truth into taking care and dealing with.
Restraint as openness for the reticent nearness of the essential occurrence
of beyng, disposing toward the most remote trembling
of appropriative intimations out of the remoteness of
the undecidable.
Restraint and seeking: the highest discovery in the seeking itself: the
nearness to the decision.
Restraint: the self-contained leap ahead into the turning of the event
(thus neither romantic flight nor staid quiescence).
Restraint, silence, and language
Words fail us; they do so originally and not merely occasionally, whereby
some discourse or assertion could indeed be carried out but is left unuttered,
i.e., where the saying of something sayable or the re-saying of
something already said is simply not carried through. Words do not yet
come to speech at all, but it is precisely in failing us that they arrive at the
first leap. This failing is the event as intimation and incursion of beyng.
This failing us is the inceptual condition for the self-unfolding
possibility of an original (poetic) naming of beyng.
Language and the great stillness, the simple nearness of the essence,
and the bright remoteness of beings, when words once again
are effective. When will such a time come? (Cf. inceptual thinking as
non-conceptual. )
Restraint: creative withstanding in the abyss (d. The grounding,
238-242. Time-space).
14. Philosophy and worldview
Philosophy is useless, though sovereign, knowledge.
Philosophy is the terrifying, though rare, questioning of the truth of
beyng.
§14 [36-38] 31
Philosophy is the grounding of truth while simultaneously being deprived
of what is true.
Philosophy is the will to return to the beginning of history and thus
is the will to surpass itself.
Therefore philosophy, seen from the outside, is merely something
decorative, perhaps something that serves to exhibit or teach culture,
perhaps also an heirloom whose ground has been lost. The many must
take philosophy in that way, precisely where and when it is something
needful for the few.
A "worldview" sets experience on a definite path and within a
determinate range, and this in such a broad way that it does not
allow the worldview itself to come into question; the worldview
thereby narrows and thwarts genuine experience. From the standpoint
of the worldview, that is precisely its strong point.
Philosophy opens experience but for that reason can precisely not
ground history immediately.
A worldview is always an end, mostly a long-protracted end, unknown
as such.
Philosophy is always a beginning and requires an overcoming of
Itself.
A worldview must forgo new possibilities in order to remain one
with itself.
Philosophy can be suspended for a long time and can apparently
disappear.
Both have their distinctive times, and both keep themselves within
history on utterly different levels of Da-sein. The distinction between
"scientific philosophy" and "worldview philosophy" is the last scion of
the philosophical bewilderment of the nineteenth century, in the
course of which "science" received a peculiar, technical-cultural
meaning, while on the other hand an individual's "worldview," as a
substitute for the vanished foundation, was still supposed to hold together
"values" and "ideals," though it could only do so weakly.
What resides as the last genuine remnant in the thought of "scientific"
philosophy (d. the deeper grasp in Fichte and Hegel) is this: to
found the knowable, and to build it up, in a unitary and systematic
(mathematical) way on the basis of, and in continuation of, the idea of
knowledge as certainty (self-certainty). There still lives in this aim of
"scientific" philosophy an urge of philosophy itself: to save the matter
that is most properly at issue in it from the arbitrariness of the opinion of
some capricious worldview and from the necessarily confining and
domineering ways of worldview in general. For, even in the "liberal"
worldview there resides a dogmatism in the sense that it demands all
32 I. Prospect [38-39]
persons be allowed their own opinion. Arbitrariness, however, is slavery
to the "accidental."
Yet the matter that is most properly at issue in philosophy has
been forgotten, misinterpreted through "epistemology"; and "ontology,"
even where it is still understood (Lotze), remains one discipline
among others. That, and how, the old guiding question (Ti TO QV;
["What are beings?"]) is saved and yet transformed throughout modern
philosophy will not come to clear knowledge, because philosophy
has already become unnecessary and owes its "cultivation" entirely
to its character as a "cultural asset."
"Worldview," just like the dominance of "worldpictures," is an
outgrowth of the modern era, a consequence of modern metaphysics.
That is why a "worldview" then seeks to set itself above philosophy.
For with the rise of "worldviews" there disappears the possibility of
a willing of philosophy, so much so that the worldview must ultimately
resist philosophy. That succeeds all the more readily the more
philosophy itself, meanwhile, had to sink down to the level of mere
erudition. This curious appearance of the dominance of "worldviews"
sought-and indeed not accidentally-to make serviceable to itself
even the last great philosophy, Nietzsche's philosophy. That happened
all the more easily because Nietzsche himself disavowed philosophy
as "erudition" and thereby apparently sided with "worldview"
(as the "poet-philosopher"!).
"Worldviews" always amount to "machination" against the tradition
and are aimed at overcoming and mastering it with the means
which are their own and which they have prepared but not carried out
to the end: to reduce everything to "lived experience."
As the grounding of the truth of beyng, philosophy has its origin in
this truth; it must retract itself into that which it grounds and build
itself up exclusively from there.
Philosophy and worldview are so incommensurable that no image
could possibly depict the distinction between them. Every image
would necessarily bring them too close together.
The covert yet obsolete "domination" of the churches, the overfamiliarity
and accessibility of "worldviews" for the masses (worldviews
that substitute for the long-missing "spirit" and for the relation
to "ideas"), the indifferent pursuit of philosophy as erudition, and at
the same time the mediate and immediate pursuit of philosophy as the
scholastic quibbling of churches and worldviews-all this will for a
long time keep at bay philosophy as the creative co-grounding of Dasein
in opposition to the current and adaptable omniscience of public
opinion. This situation is admittedly nothing to "regret" but is only a
sign that philosophy is proceeding toward the genuine destiny of its
§14 [39-40] 33
essence. And everything depends on our not disturbing this destiny
and indeed not disdaining it through an "apologetics" for philosophy,
which would be a machination that by necessity is always beneath the
rank of philosophy.
Needful indeed, however, is meditation on the drawing near of
this destiny of philosophy; needful is the knowledge of that which
disturbs, disfigures, and would lend validity to a mere semblance of
philosophy. To be sure, this knowledge would misinterpret itself if it
allowed itself to be enticed into making that disturbing element an
object of debate and refutation. The knowledge of the distorted essence
must here always remain a knowledge in passing.
The essence of worldview, an essence that lies in machination and
lived experience, compels the formation of any worldview to waver
back and forth amid the most extreme opposites and thereby also at
times to stabilize itself in compromises. The fact that "worldview" can
precisely be what is most properly at issue for individuals, for their respective
life-experience, and for the shaping of their most characteristic
opinions, and the fact that, as a counter-move to this, "worldview" can
step forth as total, as effacing all such opinions-that too belongs in the
same essence of worldview in general. As limitless as the former is in its
arbitrariness, so rigid is the latter in its definitiveness. Yet it is easy to
grasp here the opposed and the self-same: the definitiveness is merely
uniqueness expanded into the completeness of universal validity, and
arbitrariness is the possible particularization for each individual of
something definitive only of that individual. Everywhere is lacking a
sense of the necessity of what has come to be by growing but also,
thereby, a sense of the abyssal character of what is creative.
In each case, the suspicion and mistrust directed against philosophy
are just as great and just as different.
Any attitude which, as "total," claims for itself the determination
and regulation of every kind of acting and thinking must ineluctably
take everything else that might step forth as necessary and consider
it to be hostile and even degrading. How could it even be acceptable
to a "total" worldview that such a thing is even merely possible, let
alone essential, something that at once lies under it and lies above it
and that incorporates it into other necessities, ones that are hardly
offered to it from the outside but instead arise out of its own hidden
ground (e.g., out of the essence of the people)?
Thus an insurmountable difficulty arises here, and no compromise
or denial will ever remove it. The total worldview must close itself
off from the opening of its ground and from the fathoming of the ground of the
realm of its "creativity"; i.e., its creating can never come to its own essence and
become a creating beyond itself, because the total worldview would thereby
34 1. [40-42]
have to put question. The result is this: the creating is replaced,
right from the start, by bustle. The ways and risks of erstwhile creativity
are incorporated into the gigantism of machination, and the
machinational is the mere semblance of creative life.
Only questioning and the decision in favor of question-worthiness
can be set in opposition to "worldview." Every attempt at mediationfrom
whichever side it may come-weakens the positions and takes
away the realm of possibility for a genuine battle.
Total political belief and the equally total Christian belief, despite
being irreconcilable, are nevertheless involved in compromise and
tactics. That should not be surprising about these beliefs, for· they are
of the same essence. As total attitudes, they are both founded on the
renunciation of essential decisions. Their battle is not a creative one
but is "propaganda" and "apologetics."
Yet does not philosophy as well, and indeed it above all, claim the
"total," especially if we define philosophy as knowledge of beings as
such and as a whole? In fact it does, so long as we are thinking in the
form of the previous philosophy (metaphysics) and are taking this
philosophy as it was molded by Christianity (by the systematics of
German Idealism). It is precisely there, however, that (modern) philosophy
is already on the way to "worldview" (a term which, by no
accident, gains ever more validity in the sphere of this "thinking").
Yet insofar as and as soon as philosophy (in the other beginning)
finds itself back to its inceptual essence and the question of the truth
of beyng becomes the grounding center, there is then revealed what
is abyssal in philosophy, which must turn back to what is inceptual
in order to bring into the free domain of its meditation the fissure
and the "beyond itself," the strange and the perpetually unusual.
15. Philosophy as "philosophy of a people"
Who would care to deny that that is what philosophy is? And cannot a
witness be produced, one which refutes every counter-opinion: the
great beginning of Western philosophy? Is that beginning not the philosophy
"of" the Greek people? Furthermore, the great end of Western
philosophy, namely, "German Idealism" and "Nietzsche"-is that not
the philosophy "of" the German people?
Yet what do such obvious constatations actually say? Nothing about
the essence of philosophy itself. On the contrary, they simply level
philosophy down to an indifferent "accomplishment," "activity," or
mode of behavior which could be exemplified just as well by the style
of dress, manner of food preparation, etc. Reference to this obvious
fact of belonging to a "people" entices one to believe that something
§16 [42-43] 35
essential is thereby said about philosophy or even about the creation of
a future philosophy.
The expression "philosophy of a people" immediately proves to be
most ambiguous and obscure. Quite apart from the indeterminateness
involved in talking of a "people."
How does a people become a people? Does a people become only
that which it is? If so, then what is it? How can we know: (1) What a
people in general is? (2) What this or that people is? (3) What we ourselves
are?
Here all Platonic ways of thinking fail, ones which would propose,
to a body of people, an idea, a meaning and value, according to
which that people is supposed to "become." Whence and how this
posing in advance?
Meditation on what is proper to a people constitutes an essential
passageway. As little as we could be permitted not to understand this,
so much does it matter to know that a highest rank of beyng must be
attained if an "ethnic principle" by which to measure historical Dasein
is to be brought into playas something already mastered.
A people first becomes a people when its most unique members appear
and when they begin to experience a presentiment. In that way a
people first becomes free for its law (to be achieved through struggle) as
the last necessity of its highest moment. The philosophy of a people is that
which makes people people of a philosophy, grounds them historically in
their Da-sein, and destines them to stewardship of the truth of beyng.
The philosophy "of" a people is that which is free and unique and
comes just as much over as "from" a people: "over" insofar as a people
already decides for itself, for Da-sein.
The philosophy "of" a people can therefore not be predicted or prescribed
on the basis of some sort of natural aptitude or capacity of that
people. On the contrary, thinking about philosophy is genuinely related
to a people only if the thinking comprehends the fact that philosophy
has to attain through a leap its own most proper origins themselves and
that this can succeed only if philosophy still belongs at all to its first, essential
beginning. In that way alone can philosophy set the "people"
into the truth of beyng instead of the opposite, namely, being forcibly
led into a distorted essence by an alleged people as an existing one.
16. PhilosophyB
is the immediately useless but nevertheless sovereign knowledge arising from
meditation.
8. Cf. Prospect, 7. O/the event, pp. 20-23; UberZegungen IV, p. 85ff.
36 L Prospect [43-44]
Meditation [Besinnung] is a questioning that searches into meaning
[Sinn], i.e., into the truth of beyng (d. Being and Time).
The questioning of truth is the leap into its essence and thereby
into beyng itself (d. The grounding, 227. On the essence of truth).
The question asks whether and when and how we belong to being
(as event).
This question must be posed for the sake of the essence of being, which
needs us, indeed not insofar as we are just objectively present but
rather, insofar as by withstanding Da-sein we bear the latter in a
steadfast way and ground it as the truth of beyng. Therefore meditation-
leaping into the truth of being-is necessarily meditation on
oneself. That does not mean (d. The grounding) a consideration
turned back upon ourselves as "given" beings. Instead, it means the
grounding of the truth of selfhood out of the domain of what is
proper to Da-sein.
The question of whether we belong to being is also, according to
what has just been said, in itself the question of the essence of
beyng. This question of our belonging is a question of the decision
between the still-to-be-determined belonging and the abandonment
by being as the obstinate adherence to nonbeings in the semblances
of beings.
Since philosophy is such meditation, it leaps ahead into the most
extreme possible decision, and by opening that decision it is in
advance sovereign over all sheltering of truth in beings and as beings.
Therefore philosophy is sovereign knowledge as such, though
not "absolute" knowledge in the sense of the philosophy of German
Idealism.
Because meditation is meditation on oneself, however, and accordingly
brings us to the question of who we are, and because our
being is a historical one, indeed preliminarily one handed down to
us as having-been, meditation therefore necessarily becomes the
question of the truth of the history of philosophy, Le., becomes meditation
on the all-surpassing first beginning of philosophy and on the
unfolding of that beginning to the end.
Meditation on the here and now always falls short. What is essential
is a meditation on the beginning, a beginning that predelineates
its end and also incorporates "what occurs today" as the flowing out
of the end and does so in such a way that only as arising from the
beginning does what happens today become manifest in its belonging
to the history of being (d. The resonating, 57. The history ofbeyng
and the abandonment by being).
What falls short even more is the alignment of philosophy with
the "sciences," something which has-not accidentally-become a
§17 37
matter of course since the beginning of the modern era. That line of
!jut'stioning-not only the one belonging explicitly to the "theory of
~dence" -must be completely renounced.
Philosophy never builds immediately upon beings; it prepares the
truth of being and stands ready with the views and horizons which
thereby open up.
Philosophy is a conjuncture in beings such that it is compliant to beyng
.md disposes the truth ofbeyng. [Die Philo sophie ist eine Fuge im Seienden
als die sich dem Seyn fiigende Verfiigung tiber seine Wahrheit.]
17. The necessity of philosophy
An necessity is rooted in a plight. Philosophy, as the first and most
('xtreme meditation on the truth of beyng and on the beyng of truth,
btls its necessity in the first and most extreme plight.
This plight is what propels humans around among beings and
brings them for the first time before beings as a whole and in the
rnidst of beings and thus brings humans to themselves and thereby
I"ts history begin or perish.
What propels humans around is their thrownness into beings, a
thrownness that destines humans to be projectors of being (of the
tnIth of beyng).
The thrown projector carries out the first-i.e., grounding-project
tls the projection (d. The grounding, 203. The projection and Da-sein) of
beings onto beyng. In the first beginning, when humans first come to
Sia nd before beings, the projection itself, its character, its necessity, and its
are still obscure and veiled and yet powerful: <puO'u; - aA~e£lanav
- Myoe, - voDe, - nOAElloe, - Il~ ov - blKll - abtKla ["nature
unconcealedness - one - all- discourse - understanding - strife
nonbeing - justice - injustice"].
The necessity of philosophy as meditation consists in the fact that
It may not do away with that plight but must instead withstand it,
~round it, and make it the ground of the history of mankind.
That plight is nonetheless different in each of the essential beginn
ngs and transitions of this history; yet it must never be taken superficially
and hastily as deficiency, misery, or the like. It stands outside
the possibility of all "pessimistic" or "optimistic" evaluation. The basic
disposition that disposes toward the necessity is in each case correlalive
to the primordial experience of this plight.
The basic disposition of the first beginning is wonder [Er-staunen]:
wonder that beings are and that humans themselves are and are in
! he midst of that which they are not.
38 1. Prospect [46-47]
The basic disposition of the other beginning is shock [Er-schreckenl.
It is both the shock of the abandonment by being (d. The resonating)
and also the restraint that is grounded in such shock insofar as it is a
creative shock.
Plight as that which propels around and first compels the decision
and the separation of the human being, as a being, from beings and
in the midst of beings and back again to beings. This plight belongs
to the truth of beyng itself. In its most original sense, it is plight in
the compelling toward the necessity of the highest possibilities, on
whose paths human beings, in a creative and grounding way, go beyond
themselves and back into the ground of beings. Where this
plight reaches its highest level, it compels Da-sein and the grounding
of Da-sein (d. now Uetzt] w. s. 37-38, p. 18ff.9)
The plight, that which propels and essentially occurs-what if it
were the truth of beyng itself? What if, with the more original grounding
of truth, at the same time beyng essentially occurred in a more eminent
way-as the event? And what if, in this manner, the plight were more
compelling, more propelling, but such vehement propelling were only
that strife which had its self-withholding ground in the excess of the
intimacy belonging to beings and beyng?
18. The powerlessness of thinking
seems to be obvious, especially if what counts as power is the force of
immediate effectiveness and achievement. Yet what if "power" means
grounding and securing in the essence, out of the "capacity" for
change? Even then, nothing would be decided regarding the power or
powerlessness of thinking.
There are various reasons for the fact that thinking is ordinarily
taken to be without power:
1. At the present time no essential thinking is carried out or even
can be carried out.
2. Machination and lived experience claim to be all that is efficacious
and thus "powerful," and they leave no room for genuine
power.
3. Even if an essential thinking did succeed, we would still lack the
force to be open to its truth, because that requires a particular
level of Dasein.
9. Lecture course, Grundfragen der Philosophie: Ausgewiihlte "Probleme" der
"Logik," winter semester 1937-38 (GA45), p. 67ff.
§19 [47-48] 39
The increasing apathy toward the simplicity of essential meditation
and the lack of perseverance in questioning have led to a
disdaining of every proceeding and path that do not, with their
very first step, produce "results" with which we can "make" and
"experience" something.
Therefore, the charge of "powerlessness" is not so much an objection
that applies to "thinking" as it does to the detractors of thinking.
To be sure, the genuine power of thinking (as inventive thinking of
the truth of beyng) tolerates no immediate determination and evaluation,
especially since this power must transpose thinking into beyng and
bring into play the whole strangeness of beyng. Accordingly, the power
of thinking can never depend on its having objective results in beings.
That is the most hidden ground of the solitude of thoughtful queslioning.
The often-cited solitude of the thinker is merely a consequence.
In other words, the solitude is not a matter of self-withdrawal
or seclusion. Instead, it arises from the provenance of thinking out of
fhe realm of beyng. The "impact" or "effect" of a thinker will therefore
never do away with this solitude but will only increase it, provided
it makes any sense here to speak of increase.
19. Philosophy
(On the question: Who are we?)
as meditation on beyng, necessarily meditation on oneself. The
s,,\lient exposition of the ground of this connection differs in essence
fmIn every sort of establishing of the "self"-certainty of the "I" that
would be carried out precisely for the sake of "certainty" and not for
the sake of the truth of beyng. Yet the exposition of this ground
a'aches back into a still more original realm than is the realm which
had to be broached in the transition by the initial determination of
Da-sein in the "fundamental ontology" of Being and Time, a determi!
lation which even now has not been sufficiently unfolded and made
prominent in the knowledge of those who are questioning.
Now insofar as, according to the originary exposition of the ground
of the essence of meditation as meditation on oneself, "we" ourselves
,Ire transposed into the realm of questioning, then from this point of
view the philosophical question can be posed in the form: Who are we?
Disregarding the question of the "who," which ones do we mean in
speaking of "we"? (Cf. s. s. 34, Logik10 ) Ourselves, those at this moment
10. Lecture course, Uber Logik als Frage nach der Sprache, summer semester 1934
('A38).
40 1. Prospect [48-50]
objectively present those here and now? But where would the enclosing
circle be drawn? Or do we mean "the" human being as such? Yet
"the" human being "is" unhistorical only as being historical. Do we
mean ourselves as this particular people? Even then, however, we are
not the only ones but are a people with other peoples. And how is the
essence of a people determined? It is clear at once: the way in which
the questioned, namely the "we," is initially established in the question
contains already a decision about the "who." That means we cannot,
untouched by the question of the "who," postulate the "we" and
the "us" as, so to speak, something objectively present to which only
the determination of the "who" would be lacking. Even this question
reflects the turning. It is a question that cannot be either asked or answered
straightforwardly. Yet as long as the essence of philosophy is
not grasped as meditation on the truth of beyng and as long as the
necessity of the meditation on oneself, which thereby arises, has not
become effective, the question as a question is already exposed to severe
misgivings.
1. Despite the "we," the question is still directed back to ourselves
and is thereby "reflected." It requires a retrospective attitude that
runs counter to the straightforwardness of acting and producing.
2. Yet the question seems wrongheaded not only on account of this
reflective attitude but also simply as a question. Even if the question
were not "reflective" and merely made us "occupy" ourselves "with
ourselves," it would be a "theoretical" preoccupation with humans
that would distract them from acting and effecting or would at least
weaken these. Both misgivings unite in the one claim: we should be
ourselves by acting and effecting and should not question-and thereby
undermine-ourselves.
3. Already indicated in this way is the fact that it does not become
evident for what purpose this question is supposed to be asked, which
is connected to the difficulty of finding out whence we are at all supposed
to draw an answer.
Here again the most intelligible solution seems to lie in the familiar
claim: we should be ourselves by acting. And it is precisely this way to
be that answers the question of who we are, before it is even asked.
The will to be ourselves makes the question moot.
This consideration is obvious, but only because it strives-almost
unintentionally-to remain on the surface.
For, what does it mean to be ourselves? Is the human being-are weonly
in virtue of the fact that we simply let run its course that which
is joined to us and with which we are closely bound up? The sense in
which a human being is, and we are, is thoroughly unclear. The reference
to acting and effecting is insufficient as well. All "bustle," all
§19 [50-51] 41
about, places human beings in motion, and the question remains
as to whether they thereby already "are." Indeed, it cannot be
denied that they are beings of such a kind, but precisely for that reason
the question becomes more pointed: "are" humans already, if they
merely "are" in this way, merely happen to be extant, and "is" a people
itself if it is concerned merely with the increase and decrease of its
stock? Obviously, "more" belongs to the "being" of a people; this
"being" [" Sein"] is in itself characterized by a specific relationality of
essential determinations, the "unity" of which remains even more obscure.
Whence is supposed to come, for example, the endeavor to bring
"form" to the present body of the people through regulations and "organization"?
That a human being "consists" of body-soul-spirit does
not say much, since the question of the being of this unitary compound
is thereby avoided, quite apart from the fact that these "components"
and their postulation as determinations of the human being indeed
presuppose quite peculiar historical experiences of humans as well as
of their relation to beings. What is involved in the "soul" -animalj!
uX~? And in the spirit-animus, spiritus-nvEullU?
If we here take and want to take even only the smallest step in the
direction of a clarity that surpasses the mere hollow use of words,
then essential tasks of clarification arise, tasks which in the end are
not indifferent but, instead, are first decisive for the taking over and
carrying out of what it means to be a human being or a people.
Yet let us leave aside for now the question of the "being" of humans,
as asked in that way. How should we understand the self with
respect to the claim to be a self?
To ask about the "self" -does that not mean we bring ourselves into
the play of being and thus in advance have a view and understanding
of "ourselves," are present to ourselves [bei-uns]? Yet how are humans
certain they are present to themselves and not merely to a semblance,
or superficies, of their essence? Do we know ourselves-our "self"?
How are we supposed to be ourselves if we are not our selves? And how
can we be our selves without knowing who we are, such that we are
certain of being the ones we are?
The question of the "who" is therefore not an extrinsic, supervenient
question, as if its answer merely provided additional information
about us, information which has no "practical" bearing. Rather,
the question of the "who" asks about what it means to be our selves
and thus about the essence of selfhood.
The question "Who are we?" includes the question of whether we
are. The two questions are inseparable, and this inseparability is
again only an indication of the hidden essence of the human being
and specifically of the historical human being.
42 1. Prospect [51-52]
Here the gaze opens onto nexuses of a quite different sort, different
from the ones known to the mere calculating about, and tending
to, the objectively present human being, as if the task concerning the
human being were simply one of re-configuring, such as is undertaken
by a potter with a lump of clay.
The selfhood of the human being-of the historical human being as
the selfhood of a people-is a realm of occurrences, a realm in which
human beings are appropriated to themselves only if they themselves
reach the open time-space wherein an appropriation can occur.
The most proper "being" of humans is therefore grounded in a
belonging to the truth of being as such, and this is so, again, because
the essence of being as such, not the essence of the human being,
contains in itself a call to humans, as a call destining them to history
(d. The grounding, 197. Da-sein-domain of what is proper-selfhood).
From this it is clear: that question of the "who," as the carrying
out of meditation on the self, has nothing in common with an overcurious,
egotistic, lost preoccupation with one's "own" lived experiences
but, instead, is an essential path in the carrying out of the
question regarding what is most question-worthy, namely, the question
that first opens the worthiness of what is most question-worthy,
the question of the truth of being.
Only one who grasps that humans must ground their essence historically,
through the grounding of Da-sein, and that the steadfastness
of withstanding Da-sein is nothing other than dwelling in the
time-space of that occurrence which eventuates as the absconding of
the gods, only one who creatively takes the dismay and the bliss of
the event back into restraint as the basic disposition, only such a one
can have a presentiment of the essence of being and in such meditation
can prepare the truth for what will be true in the future.
Those who sacrifice themselves to this preparation stand in the
transition and must have reached far ahead; they also may expect
from their contemporaries no ready understanding-as immediately
pressing as that might be-but, if anything, only resistance.
Meditation, in the form of meditation on the self, as it becomes
necessary here from the question of the essence of beyng, is far from
that clara et distincta perceptio in which the ego emerges and becomes
certain. Since selfhood-the site of the moment of the call and of the
belonging-must first be brought up for decision, what approaches
the transition cannot be grasped in that transition.
All "resorting" to what is past remains unproductive unless it arises
out of the extreme decisions; otherwise it merely serves to avoid those
decisions through the greatest possible adulteration of them.
§ 19 [52-53] 43
In meditation and through it, there necessarily occurs the "always
still other," to prepare for which is the genuine task, but which would
not find a site for the event if there were not a clearing for what is hidPhilosophy
as meditation on the self, in the way just indicated,
Can be carried out only as inceptual thinking of the other beginning.
This meditation on the self has put all "subjectivism" behind itself,
{'ven the one that most dangerously lies concealed in the cult of "personality."
Where this latter is postulated and "genius" is correspondingly
postulated in art, everything moves-despite assurances to the
contrary-on the path of the modern conception of the "I" and of
('onsciousness. Whether personality is understood as the unity of
#$pirit-soul-body," or whether this hodge-podge is reversed and,
merely assertorically, the body is placed first, nothing changes with
regard to the confused thinking which rules here and which evades
t;'very question. The "spirit" is thereby always taken as "reason," as
the faculty that makes possible the saying of "I." Here even Kant was
turther advanced than this biological liberalism. Kant saw that the
person is more than the ''I''; the person is grounded in self-lawgiving.
Admittedly, even this remained Platonism.
Would one perhaps attempt to provide a biological foundation for
the saying of "I"? If not, then the reversal just mentioned is mere
trifling, which this way of thinking is, even without the reversaL
because the concealed metaphysics of "body" and "sensibility," "soul"
and "spirit," remains here presupposed and unquestioned.
Meditation on the self, as the grounding of selfhood, stands outside
the theories just mentioned. Meditation on the self certainly knows that
something essential is decided if the question of who we are is asked or
if it is not only held off but is altogether denied as a question.
Unwillingness to ask this question signifies either a shrinking back
from the questionable truth about the human being or a propagating
of the conviction that who we are has been decided for all eternity.
If it has been so decided, then all experiences and accomplishments
are carried out merely as an expression of a "self-certain life"
and are therefore held to be organizable. In principle, there is no
experience that could ever set humans beyond themselves into an
untrodden domain from which the human being as hitherto understood
could become questionable. This (namely, such self-certainty)
is the innermost essence of "liberalism," which precisely for that reason
can apparently unfold freely and can prescribe itself for the sake
of achieving eternal progress. Accordingly, "worldview," "personality,"
"genius," and "culture" are endowments and "values" which are
to be made actual in this or that way.
44 1. [54-551
To ask the question of who we are is in fact more dangerous here than
any other opposition encountered on the same level of certainty about
the human being (the final form of Marxism, a form that has essentially
nothing to do with Jewishness or even with Russianness; if an
undeveloped spiritualism still lies dormant someplace, then that place
is the Russian people; Bolshevism is originally Western, a European
possibility: the rise of the masses, industry, technology, the dying out
of Christianity; insofar, however, as the supremacy of reason, qua
equalization of everyone, is merely a consequence of Christianity,
which is itself basically of Jewish origin {d. Nietzsche's idea of the
slave revolt in morals}, Bolshevism is in fact Jewish; but then Christianity
is also basically Bolshevist! Which decisions thereby become
necessary?).
Yet the dangerousness of the question of who we are is at the same
time, provided danger can compel what is highest, the only way for
us to come to ourselves and thereby clear a path for the original salvation,
i.e., the justification of the West out of its history.
The dangerousness of this question is in itself so essential for us
that it loses the appearance of opposition to the new German will.
Yet this question, as a philosophical one, must be prepared for a
long time hence and, provided it understands itself, cannot claim to
want to replace, or even merely determine, what at the moment is
the immediately necessary course.
Especially since the question of who we are must remain purely
and fully incorporated into the asking of the basic question: how
does beyng essentially occur?
20. The beginning and inceptual thinkingll
The beginning is what grounds itself and what reaches ahead; it is selfgrounding
in the ground which is fathomed and opened up through
the beginning; the beginning reaches ahead insofar as it grounds and
is therefore unsurpassable. Because every beginning is unsurpassable,
it must constantly be repeated and must be placed through confrontation
into the uniqueness of its incipience [Anfanglichkeit] and thus of its
ineluctable reaching ahead. This confrontation is original when it itself
is inceptual, but this necessarily as another beginning.
11. With regard to "beginning," d. lecture course, Der Anfang der abendlandischen
Philosoph ie, summer semester 1932 (GA35); rectoral address, "Die Selbstbehauptung
der deutschen Universitat," 1933 (GAI6); Freiburg lecture, "Vom
Ursprung des Kunstwerkes," 1935.
[55-56] 45
what occurs only once stands in the possibility of It
,done has in itself the ground of the necessity of a reversion to it and
d resumption of its incipience. Here re-petition does not mean the
stupid superficiality and impossibility of the mere occurrence of the
,wmle for a second and third time. Indeed the beginning can never be
apprehended as the same, since it reaches ahead and thus encroaches
differently each time on that which it itself initiates. Accordingly, it
determines its own re-petition.
What is inceptual is never the new, because the new is merely
what is already fast becoming passe. Nor is the beginning ever the
"eternal," because the beginning is precisely not taken out of, and
€lway from, history.
Yet what is the beginning of thinking, if thinking signifies meditation
on beings as such and on the truth of beyng?
21. Inceptual thinking12
(Projection)
The inventive thinking of the truth of beyng is essentially pro-jection.
By its very essence, such a projection, in being carried out and
unfolded, must place itself back into that which it opens. This might
lrlake it seem that where the projection reigns, there is arbitrariness
imd a wandering about in what is ungrounded. Yet the projection
places itself precisely on the ground and in that way first transforms
itself into the necessity to which it is related from the ground up, alI
hough in a still hidden way prior to its enactment.
The projection of the essence of beyng is merely an answer to the
('all. If unfolded, the projection loses every semblance of self-aggrandizement
and yet never becomes self-loss and surrender. What is
opened by it has persistence only in the grounding that shapes history.
What is projected in the projection overpowers the projection
Itself and justifies it.
The projection unfolds the projector and at the same time captures
the projector in that which is opened up. This capture that pertains
to the essential projection is the beginning of the grounding of the
trllth attained in the projection.
What and who "is" the projector-that becomes graspable only out
of the truth of the projection, yet it also becomes concealed at the same
lime. For this is what is most essential, namely, that the opening qua
dearing brings into play the self-concealing, whereby the sheltering of
12. Cf. The grounding.
46 L Prospect [56-58]
truth first receives its ground and impetus (d. The grounding, 244.
and 245. Truth and sheltering).
22. Inceptual thinking
is the inventive thinking of the truth of beyng and thus is the fathoming
of the ground. In its resting on the ground, such thinking manifests,
first and only, its grounding, gathering, and retaining power.
Yet how is the inventive thinking of beyng a resting on the
ground? By opening up what is most question-worthy, it carries out
the honoring and thereby the highest transfiguration of that in
which the questioning rests, i.e., does not stop. For the questioning
(as opening) could otherwise not rest on anything.
That the questioning rests on the ground means that it finds its
way into the extreme domain of oscillation, into the belonging to the
most extreme occurrence, which is the turning in the event (d. The last
god, 255. The turning in the event). This finding of its way happens in
the leap, which unfolds as the grounding of Da-sein.
23. Inceptual thinking.
Why thinking out of the beginning?
Why a more original repetition of the first beginning?
Why meditation on its history?
Why a confrontation with its end?
Is it because the other beginning (out of the truth of being) has
become necessary?
Then why beginning at all? (Cf. Oberlegungen IV with regard to
beginning and transition.)
It is because only the greatest occurrence, the most intimate event;
can still save us from lostness in the bustle of mere incidents and
machinations. What must eventuate is what opens being to us and
places us back into being and in that way brings us to ourselves and
face to face with work and sacrifice.
The greatest event, however, is always the beginning, even if it is
the beginning of the last god. For the beginning is the concealed, the
origin that has not yet been misused and driven on, the one which
reaches furthest ahead in constantly withdrawing and thus preserves
within itself the highest sovereignty. This unexploited power of the
seclusion of the richest possibilities of courage (of the disposedknowing
will with respect to the event) is the only rescue and trial.
§23 [58-59] 47
For this reason, inceptual thinking is necessary as a confrontation
between the first beginning, which is still to be won back, and the
other beginning, which is to be unfolded. In this necessity, such
thinking compels us to the broadest, most acute, and most constant
meditation and prevents all flight from decisions and all ways of
avoiding them.
Inceptual thinking seems completely beside the point and useless.
And yet, if indeed we are to think here in terms of usefulness, what
Is more useful than to be rescued into being?
Then what is the beginning, such that it can become the highest of all
beings? It is the essential occurrence of being itself, but this beginning
can be carried out only as the other beginning, in confrontation with the
first. The beginning-grasped primordially-is beyng itself. In accord
with it, thinking is more original than representing and judging.
The beginning is beyng itself as event, the concealed sovereignty of
the origin of the truth of beings as such. And beyng as the event is
the beginning.
Inceptual thinking is:
1. letting beyng protrude into beings out of the silence-bearing utterance
of the grasping word. (Building on this mountain range.)
2. the preparation for this act of building through the preparation for
the other beginning.
3. setting the other beginning in motion as confrontation with the
first beginning in its more original repetition.
4. in itself sigetic, precisely bearing silence in the most explicit
meditation.
The other beginning must be brought into effect entirely out of
beyng as event and out of the essential occurrence of its truth and of
the history of that truth (d. e.g., the other beginning and its relation
to German Idealism).
Inceptual thinking transposes its questioning of the truth of beyng
all the way back into the first beginning as the origin of philosophy.
Such thinking thereby attains the guarantee of coming from afar in its
other beginning and of finding-by mastering its heritage-its highest
future constancy and of thereby re-attaining itself in a changed (vs.
the first beginning) necessity.
What distinguishes inceptual thinking is its sovereign essence, by
which a confrontation in the highest and simplest is first compelled
and carried out. Inceptual thinking is sovereign knowledge. A great
future must be thought in advance and borne by the one who wishes
to go far back-to the first beginning.
The claim of philosophical thinking can never apply to the instantaneous
comprehension and concurrence that are common to everyone.
48 1. Prospect [59-60]
Philosophical thinking does not tolerate exploitation. Because such
thinking thinks what is most unique and strange, beyng, which
otherwise is what is most common and ordinary in the usual understanding
of being, this thinking is therefore necessarily rare and alien.
Nevertheless, because it involves this uselessness it must immediately
and in advance summon and endorse those who can plow and hunt, do
handcraft and hauL build and organize. It itself must know that it is always
reputed to be unrecompensed exertion.
In the domain of the other beginning, there is neither "ontology"
nor any "metaphysics." No "ontology," because the guiding question
no longer delimits the measure and the sphere of inquiry. No "metaphysics,"
because the procedure is not at all to pass from beings as objectively
present or objects as known (idealism) and step over to something
else (ct. The interplay). Both are merely transitional names, for
the sake of instituting a minimal intelligibility.
Which are the ways and modes of presenting and communicating
the conjuncture of inceptual thinking? The first elaboration of the conjuncture
(The resonating-The last god) cannot avoid the danger of
being read and taken as a diffuse "system." The focusing on individual
questions (the origin of the work of art) must dispense with a uniform
opening up and elaborating of the entire domain of conjuncture.
To take both ways as supplementing each other ever remains only
an emergency path. Yet are there other ways in the era of plight?
What good fortune is here reserved for the poet! Signs and images
are allowed to possess the poet's very heart, and what is essential to
the "poem" can in each case be incorporated into its visible form.
Yet what about the way in which the concept is to fathom the necessity
and in which the question strives to trace out its own paths?
24. The aberrant demand placed on inceptual thinking
is, for example, the claim that such thinking should immediately
(without the plight having been withstood) say where the decision resides;
should indicate what is to be done, without having radically
grounded the historical locale of the history to come; and should immediately
save us, even before such saving can encounter a far-reaching
will aimed at a transformed positing of goals.
The position taken on thinking involves a double mis-valuation:
1. an over-valuing, in the sense that immediate answers are expected
for an attitude that wants to spare itself the task of questioning (resoluteness
for meditation and for withstanding the plight).
§25 [60-62] 49
2. an under-valuing, in the sense that thinking is measured against
ordinary representations, and its power of grounding timespace-
its preparatory character-is not recognized.
Whoever would be a teacher in the domain of inceptual thinking
must possess the restraint of being able to renounce "effectiveness"
and must never allow self-delusion through the semblant success of
achieving notoriety and being on everyone's tongue.
The most severe impediment to inceptual thinking, however, is the
tacit self-apprehension of humans today. Quite apart from individual
Interpretations and aims, humans take themselves as objectively present
"exemplars" of the species "human being." This also carries over to
historical being as an incident within an already extant affiliation.
Where this interpretation of being human (and thereby also of being a
people) prevails, there is no possible foothold, or demand, for an advent
of the god, and not even a demand for the experience of the
absconding of the gods. Precisely this experience presupposes that
historical human beings know themselves to be transported into the
open midst of beings which have been abandoned by the truth of their
being.
This latter aberrant demand arises from a lack of recognition of
the essence of truth as the clearing-concealing of the "there" which
must be withstood in the steadfastness of questioning.
Every gathering into a more original affiliation, however, can be
prepared for the basic experience of Da-sein.
25. Historicality and being
Historicality here grasped as one truth, the clearing-concealing of being
as such. Inceptual thinking as historical, i.e., as co-grounding history in
compliant disposability.
Sovereignty over the masses who have become free (i.e., groundless
and self-serving) must be erected and sustained with the shackles
of "organization." In this way can what is thereby "organized" grow
back in its original ground, so that what is of the masses is not simply
controlled but transformed? Does this possibility have any prospects
at all, given the increasing "artificiality" of life, which facilitates and
by itself organizes that "freedom" of the masses, that arbitrary accessibility
of everything for everyone? No one, however, should undervalue
resistance to the inexorable uprooting, calling a halt to it; indeed,
that is what must happen first. Yet would that guarantee the
transformation of the uprootedness into a rootedness, and above all
50 I. Prospect [62-63]
would the means necessary for such an action guarantee this transformation?
Still another sovereignty is needed here, one that is concealed and
restrained and that for a long time will be sparse and quiet. Here the
future ones must be prepared, those who create in being itself new
locations out of which a constancy in the strife of earth and world
will eventuate again.
Both forms of sovereignty, though fundamentally different, must
be willed and simultaneously affirmed by those who know. Here at the
same time is a truth in which the essence of beyng is surmised: in
beyng there essentially occurs a fissure into the highest uniqueness
and the flattest commonality.
26. Philosophy as knowledge
If knowledge as preservation of the truth of what is true (preservation
of the essence of truth in Da-sein) distinguishes the future human
being (vs. the rational animal of heretofore) and elevates this being
to the stewardship of beyng, then the highest knowledge is the one
that becomes strong enough to be the origin of a renunciation. For us,
renunciation is now of course a matter of weakness and evasion, a
suspending of the will; in that sense, renouncing is giving way and
abdication.
There is, however, a renunciation that not only does hold fast but
even brings forth something through struggle and suffering, that renunciation
which arises as the preparation for the refusal, i.e., as the
holding fast to this alienation which in such a form essentially occurs
as beyng itself, that in-the-midst [In mitten] with respect to beings and
to divinization which grants the open "between" in whose playing
field of time-space the sheltering of truth in beings interpenetrates
with the absconding and advent of the gods. Knowledge of the refusal
(Da-sein as renunciation) unfolds as the long preparation for the
decision regarding truth: whether truth again is to become lord of
what is true (correct) or is itself to be measured only according to
what is true (what comes under truth itself)-in other words,
whether truth is not only to remain the goal of technical-practical
knowledge (a "value" and an "idea") but instead is to become the
grounding of the uprising of the refusal.
This knowledge unfolds as the questioning of beyng that reaches far
ahead; the question-worthiness of beyng compels all creating into
the plight, erects a world for beings, and rescues what is reliable of
the earth.
§27 [63-64]
27. Inceptual thinking
(Concept)
51
"Thinking," in the ordinary determination that has been usual for a
long time, is the representing of something in its iOEa ["look"] as the
KOlVOV ["common"], the representing of something in its generality.
On the one hand, this thinking is related to the objectively present,
to what has already come to presence (a determinate interpretation of
beings). Yet this thinking is therefore always subsequent, in the sense
that it merely provides to the things that have already been interpreted
their most general features. Such thinking prevails in various ways in
science. The expression "generality" is ambiguous, especially since the
designation of what is thought as the KOlVOV is already not based originally
on what is itself seen but on the "many," on "beings" (as ll~ QV
[Hnonbeing"]). The postulation of the many and the basic relation to
them are decisive, at first in such a way that even from the standpoint
of consciousness the "many" are the "over and against" without properly
and previously being determined in their truth and grounded
therein. That is precisely supposed to be accomplished by what is "general."
The way this view of thinking is then coupled to the introduction
and acquisition of "categories" and the way the "form of thinking"
characteristic of the assertion becomes the standard.
This thinking was once-in the first beginning, in Plato and
Aristotle-still creative. Yet is was precisely this thinking that created
the domain in which the representing of beings as such later came to
prevail and in which the abandonment by being then unfolded in
ever-greater concealment.
Inceptual thinking is the original carrying out of resonating, interplay,
leap, and grounding in their unity. "Carrying out" here means
that these-resonating, interplay, leap, and grounding in their unityare
taken up and borne only in the human way and that they themselves
are always essentially other and pertain to the occurrence of
Da-sein.
The precision of speech in this thinking and the simplicity of the
Incising word are measured against a conceptuality that dismisses all
mere cleverness as empty importunity. What is grasped, what is here
always and only to be grasped, is beyng in each case simply in the
joining of those junctures. The sovereign knowledge of this thinking
never allows itself to be uttered in a proposition, but just as little can
what is to be known remain abandoned to an indeterminate and
unsteady representing.
52 1. Prospect [64-65]
Concept [Begrzffl is here originally "epitome" ["Inbegriff"L and this
first and always is related to an accompanying comprehensive grasp
[Zusammengrzjf] of the turning in the event.
At first the epitomizing can be indicated by the relation each concept
of being-as a concept, i.e., in its truth-has to Da -sein and thereby
to the steadfastness of the historical human being. Inasmuch, however,
as Da-sein first grounds itself as belonging to the call in the turning
of the event, what is most intimate to the epitome [das Innigste des
Inbegriffs] lies in the grasping of the turning itself, in that knowledge
which, by withstanding the plight of the abandonment by being,
stands in the preparedness for the call, i.e., in that knowledge which
speaks by first keeping silent out of the steadfastness which withstands
in Da-sein.
The epitome [In-begrzjf] is here never the encompassing [Ein-begreifen]
in the sense of the inclusiveness of a genus; instead, it refers to the
knowledge that derives from being steadfast in and that takes the
intimacy of the turning and raises it into the clearing-concealment.
28. The immeasurableness of inceptual thinking as finite thinking
This thinking and its order (the one unfolded from it) lie outside the
question of whether a system belongs to them or not. A "system" is possible
only as the result of the prevailing of mathematical thought (taking
"mathematical" in the broad sense) (d. w. s. 35-613 ). A thinking that
stands outside of that domain and of its corresponding determination of
truth as certainty is therefore essentially systemless, un-systematic. Yet
it is not consequently arbitrary and confused. "Un-systematic" means
"confused" and "disordered" only if system is the measuring rod.
Inceptual thinking in the other beginning has a different sort of
rigor: the freedom of the joining of its junctures. Here one thing is
joined to the other out of the sovereignty of the questioning way of
belonging to the call.
The rigorousness of restraint is other than the one of the "exactitude"
of a loose, indifferent "reasoning" which belongs equally to everyone
and whose results are compelling within the sphere of its own claims
to certainty. Such results are compelling, however, only because the
claim to truth is content with the correctness that comes from deduction
and from insertion into a regulated and calculable order. This contentment
is the reason the results are compelling.
13. Lecture course, Die Frage nach dem Ding: Zu Kants Lehre von den transzendentalen
Grundsiitzen, winter semester 1935-36 (GA41).
§30 [66-67]
29. Inceptual thinkingl4
(The question of the essence)
53
In the realm of the guiding question, the understanding of the essence
is determined on the basis of beingness (oucria-KOtvOV [Hbeingnesscommon"]),
and the essentiality of the essence consists in the greatest
possible generality of the essence. This means, conversely, that the particular
and manifold, which fall under the concept of the essence and
from which this concept is established, are arbitrary; indeed, what is
essential is the arbitrariness of beings, which nevertheless is precisely
what the belonging to the essence indicates.
On the other hand, where beyng is conceived as event, essentiality
1s determined out of the originality and uniqueness of beyng itself.
There the essence is not the general but is the essential occurrence
precisely of what is unique in each case and of what constitutes the
rank of the being.
The question of the essence contains in itself what is decisive,
which now from the ground up pervasively determines the question
of being.
Projection is establishing of rank and is decision.
The principle of inceptual thinking therefore sounds like something
doubled: all essence is essential occurrence [alles Wesen ist Wesung].
Every essential occurrence is determined out of what is essential
in the sense of the original-unique.
30. Inceptual thinking
(as meditation)
is essentially, as the carrying out and preparing for the resonating and
the interplay, first of all transition [Ubergang] and as such is a downgoing
[Unter-gang].
In the transition, meditation is carried out, and meditation is necessarily
meditation on oneself. This indicates, however, that such
thinking is still related to us ourselves and thus to the human being
and requires a new determination of the essence of that being. Insofar
as, in the modern era, that essence is postulated as consciousness
and self-consciousness, it seems that the transitional meditation
must become a new clarification of self-consciousness. For one thing,
14. Cf. in ·The leap," the beyng of the essence.
54 1. Prospect [67-68]
we cannot simply bypass the current standing of self-consciousness,
in which self-consciousness is more a matter of calculation. The basic
experience of inceptual thinking would therefore indeed concern
beings in the sense of contemporary human beings, their situation,
and thus the "reflection" of humans on "themselves."
This train of thought is not incorrect and yet is untrue. Inasmuch
as history and historical meditation bear and dominate the human
being, all meditation is also meditation on oneself. The point, however,
is that the meditation to be carried out in inceptual thinking
does not take the seifhood of humans as given, as something that can
be attained immediately by representing the "I" and the we and their
situation. For in this way selfhood is precisely not discovered but is definitively
lost and distorted (d. The grounding, 197. Da-sein-domain of
what is proper-selfhood).
The meditation of inceptual thinking is, rather, so original that it
first asks how the selfis to be grounded, in whose domain "we," you
and I, in each case come to our selves. Thus it is problematic whether,
through reflection on "us" we do find ourselves, i.e., our selves, and
consequently whether the projection of Da-sein has anything at all
to do with the clarification of "self" -consciousness.
It is indeed in no way settled that the "self" is ever determinable
by means of a representation of the ego. Instead, it must be acknowledged
that selfhood first arises out of the grounding of Da-sein, a
grounding that is carried out as an appropriation of the belonging to
the call. Accordingly, the openness and grounding of the self arise
out of, and as, the truth of beyng (d. The grounding, 197. Da-seindomain
of what is proper-selfhood). Neither the differently intended
dissection of the essence of the human being nor an indication of
other modes of being of this being (all these would in themselves
merely serve to improve anthropology) can here bring forth meditation
on oneself; instead, the question of the truth of being is what
prepares the domain of that selfhood in which humans (we) first
come to themselves through historical actions and accomplishments
and in the configuration of a people.
To be sure, what is proper to Da-sein, as grounded in selfhood, can
at first be indicated transitionally in relation to the previous egological
self-consciousness and only in relation to it: Da-sein as in each case
one's own Ue meines]. In this connection it is to be borne in mind that
even this egological self-consciousness assumed through Kant and German
Idealism a very different form, one in which there is co-posited an
assignment to the "we," to the historical, and to the absolute. Moreover,
there is immediately given with Da-sein a transposition into the
§31 [68-69] 55
open. To wish to find "subjectivism" here is, apart from anything else,
[ways superficial.
The meditation of inceptual thinking concerns us (ourselves) and
yet does not. It does not concern us so as to bring out from us the
prescriptive determinations; but it does concern us as historical beings
and concerns us specifically in the plight of the abandonment by
being (at first, decline in the understanding of being, and then forgetting
of being). It concerns us, who thus are initially posited in our
exposure amid beings; it concerns us in this manner in order that we
find our way beyond ourselves to selfhood.
The transitional character of inceptual thinking makes this ambiguity
unavoidable, as if at issue here were an anthropologically existentiell
reflection in the usual sense. In truth, however, every step is
borne by the question of the truth of beyng.
The gazing upon ourselves is carried out from a leap ahead into Da-sein.
For the sake of the first meditation, however, there had to be an attempt
to set in relief at all, utterly with respect to extreme modes of being of
the human being, the difference in kind between Dasein and all "lived
experience" and "consciousness."
The temptation is strong to believe that the entire meditation in
the first [published] half of Being and Time is limited to the sphere of
an anthropology, one that merely takes a peculiar direction.
31. The style ofinceptual thinking
Style: the self-certainty of Dasein in its grounding law-giving and in
its enduring of wrath.
The style of restraint, because restraint disposes steadfastness pervasively
and from the ground up as the remembering expectation of
the event.
This restraint also pervasively disposes all playing out of the strife
between world and earth.
Restraint is subservient to the gentle measure-enduring it through
silence-and undergoes the bitter wrath; these both-belonging to
each other-encounter each other in different ways out of the earth as
well as from the world.
Style as a grown certainty is the law of the carrying out of truth in
the sense of the sheltering in beings. Because art, for example, is the
setting of truth into a work, and because in the work the sheltering in
itself comes to stand in relation to itself, therefore "style," even if
barely grasped, is visible especially in the field of art. Nevertheless,
56 1. [69-71]
the idea of style is here not broadened and transferred from art to Dasein
as such.
32. The event
A decisive gaze after the carrying out of the
resonating and the interplay
The task now is to gaze in advance at the relation of being and truth
and to see how out of this relation time and space are grounded in
their original belonging together, despite their strangeness.
Truth is the clearing-concealing which occurs as transporting and
captivation. These, in their unity as well as in excess, provide the
encompassed open realm for the play of beings which, in the sheltering
of their truth, come to be as thing, toot machination, work, act,
sacrifice.
Yet transporting and captivation can also harden into indifference,
and then the open is taken as a place of common, objectively present
things which seem to be the beings, because they are actual. On account
of this concealed indifference deriving from the semblant absence
of transporting and captivation, these (transporting and captivation)
then appear as exceptions, as extraordinary, whereas they
indeed show the ground and essence of truth. That indifferent validity
[Gleich-giiltigkeit] is also the domain in which all representing,
opinion, and correctness play out (d. The grounding; on space).
That essence of truth, however, the transporting-captivating clearing
and concealing as the origin of the "there," essentially occurs in its
ground which we experience as ap-propriation. The approach and absconding,
the advent and retreat, or the simple remaining absent of
the gods; for us in the sovereignty, i.e., beginning and dominion over
this occurrence, the initial and final sovereignty which will show itself
as the last god. In the intimations of the last god, being itself, the event
as such, first becomes visible, and this shining requires both the
grounding of the essence of truth as clearing-concealing and its final
sheltering in the changed forms of beings.
What has otherwise and previously been thought about space and
time, which belong back in this origin of truth, is a consequence of an
already established essence of beings as ouota and of truth as correctness,
and of everything which thereby results regarding the "categories."
Aristotle already showed this in detail, for the first time in the
Physics. Kant's characterization of space and time as "intuitions" is
merely a feeble attempt, within this history, to save the proper essence
of space and time. But Kant had no path to the essence of space and time.
§32 57
In any case, the orientation toward the "I" and "consciousness," as well
wward representing, obstructs every path and bridge.
Truth l5
What was indicated about it on the occasion of the lectures on the
work of art, and was conceived as "instituting," is already the consequence
of the sheltering which properly preserves the clearedconcealed.
It is exactly this preservation which first allows beings to
be and indeed as the beings they are and can be in the truth of the not
yet thematized being [Sein] and in the way this truth is unfolded.
(What counts as that which is is the present, the actual. to which the
necessary and the possible are at first merely related-the usual exrlmple
from the history of the first beginning.)
The sheltering is itself carried out in and as Da-sein. That happens,
l'lIld gains and loses history, in the steadfast care-taking which in
advance pertains to the event though scarcely has knowledge of the
t:vent. This care-taking, conceived not on the basis of everydayness
but from the selfhood of Dasein, abides in various mutually requisite
modes: the fabrication of implements, the instituting of machinations
(technology), the creation of works, the acts that form states,
tlnd thoughtful sacrifice. In all of these, in each one differently, a
pre-forming and co-forming of cognition and of essential knowledge
ilS the grounding of truth. "Science" only a remote scion of a determinate
permeation of implement-production, etc.; nothing autonornous
and never to be brought into connection with the essential
knowledge of the inventive thinking of being (philosophy).
The sheltering abides not only in modes of production but just as
originally in the mode of reception in encountering the lifeless and the
living: stone, plant, animal. human. The being-taken-back into the
~elf-secluding earth happens here. This happening of Da-sein is never
something for itself, however; it belongs instead within the kindling of
the strife between earth and world and of steadfastness in the event.
Philosophy: to find and make appear the simple sights and native
forms in which the essential occurrence of beyng is sheltered and
taken to heart.
Who is capable of both the most distant gaze into the most con(
ealed essence of beyng and the most immediate fortunate success of
the appearing form of beings that shelter?
How do we create for beyng, by leaping ahead into its essential occurrence,
the thrusting out of its beings so that the truth of beyng might
preserve as an impetus the power of beyng to endure historically?
15. Cf. The grounding.
58 I. Prospect [72-73]
To thinking there remains only the simplest saying of the plainest
image in purest reticence. The future first thinker must be capable of
that.
33. The question of beyng
As long as we do not recognize that all calculation in terms of "pur_
poses" and "values" arises from a quite determinate interpretation of
beings (as io€a), as long as we do not grasp that the question of beyng is
not even surmised thereby, let alone asked, as long as we finally do not
testify, by carrying it out, that we know of the necessity of this unasked
question and accordingly are already asking it, as long as all this remains
outside the horizon of that which still deports itself like "philosophy,"
that is how long all vociferous fussing over "beyng," "ontology,"
"transcendence" and "paratranscendence," "metaphysics," and the supposed
overcoming of Christianity is groundless and empty. One is still
unwittingly moving in the ruts of the same neo-Kantianism that is so
often reviled. For nowhere is thoughtful work accomplished; not a single
step of a revelatory questioning is carried out.
Precisely the one who has grasped the question of being and has actually
at one time tried to traverse its course can hope to receive nothing
more from "antiquity" and from its lineage except for the frightful admonition
to transfer questioning back again to the same ground of necessity-
not of that initial, definitively past necessity which only thus
occurs essentially. Instead, "repetition" here means to let the same, the
uniqueness of beyng, become a plight again and thereby out of a more original
truth. "Again" means here precisely "altogether otherwise." But that
frightful admonition still lacks a hearing and a willingness to sacrifice,
to stay on the scarcely opened-up next stretch of the course.
Instead, one deludes oneself and others, evading one's own perplexity,
by means of a noisy fanaticism for the "antiquity" suffered by
Nietzsche.
How far removed from such goings-on are, for example, the figure
and work of Hermann Lotze, the most genuine witness to the easily
reviled, and much reviled, nineteenth century?
34. The event and the question of being
The event is the self-eliciting and self-mediating center in which all essential
occurrence of the truth of beyng must be thought back in advance.
This thinking back in advance to that center is the inventive
§34 [73-74] 59
thinking of beyng. And all concepts of beyng must be uttered from
there.
Conversely: everything which-at first and in the plight and merely
in the transition from the developed guiding question to the basic
question-is thought about beyng and is interrogated as a way to the
truth of beyng (the unfolding of Da-sein) must never be translated
into the groundless wasteland of any previous "ontology" or "doctrine
of categories."
The tacit presentiment of the event offers itself prominently and
at once in historical recollection (ouota = napouota ["presence"]) as
"primordial temporality": the occurrence of the having-been/preserving
and futurallanticipating transporting, i.e., the occurrence of
the opening and grounding of the "there" and thus of the essence of
truth.
"Primordial temporality" is never meant as an improved version
of the concept of time, as the usual substitution of "lived time" (Bergson-
Dilthey) for the concept of calculable time. All of that remains
outside the recognized necessity of the transition from the guiding
question, grasped as such, to the basic question.
In Being and Time, "time" is a directive toward, and a resonating with,
that which takes place in the uniqueness of the ap-propriation as the
truth of the essential occurrence of beyng.
It is only here, in this original interpretation of time, that the
realm is encountered in which time and space reach the most extreme
differentiation and thus precisely attain the most intimate essential
occurrence. This relation is prepared in the presentation of
the spatiality of Da-sein, which is not the spatiality of the "subject"
or the "I" (d. The grounding, space).
The confusion and lack of discipline in contemporary "thinking"
require us to grasp its ways almost catechetically, i.e., in the form of
identified "questions." To be sure, the will and style of decisive
thought never reside in a more didactic meditation on these questions.
Yet for the sake of clarity, especially over and against the idle
talk of "ontology" and "being," what must be known first is the
following:
Beings are.
Beyng essentially occurs.
"Beings"-this term names not only the actual (and certainly not if
this is taken as the present at hand and the latter merely as the object of
knowledge), not only the actual of any sort, but at the same time the
possible, the necessary, and the accidental, everything that stands in
beyng in any way whatever, even including negativity and nothingness.
Those who fancy themselves only too clever and immediately
60 1. Prospect [74-76]
uncover a "contradiction" here, since indeed nonbeings cannot
are thinking in much too narrow a way with their "non-contradiction"
as the measure of the essence of beings.
"Beyng" does not simply mean the actuality of the actual, and not
simply the possibility of the possible, and in general not simply being
[Sein] understood on the basis of particular beings; instead, it means
beyng out of its original essential occurrence in the full fissure. Nor
is "essential occurrence" limited to "presence."
To be sure, the essential occurrence of beyng itself (and thereby
beyng in its most unique uniqueness) does not allow itself to be experienced
arbitrarily and straightforwardly, like a being; rather, it opens
itself only in the momentariness of Da-sein's leap in advance into the
event (d. The last god, 255. The turning in the event).
Moreover, no way ever leads immediately from the being of beings
to beyng, because the view of the being of beings already takes place
outside of the momentariness of Dasein.
On this basis, an essential distinction and clarification can be introduced
into the question of being. Such distinction and clarification
are never the answer to the question of being but are merely the
formation of the questioning, an awakening and clarification of the
power to raise this question, one which in each case arises only out of
the plight and impetus of Da-sein.
Anyone who asks about beings as beings (Bv n QV) and thereby, with
this approach and directionality, asks about the being of beings is standing
in the realm of the very question that guided the beginning of Western
philosophy and its history up to its end in Nietzsche. We therefore
name this question of being (the question of the being of beings) the
guiding question. Its most general form was impressed on it by Aristotle:
Ti TO QV; (What are beings?). That is to say, for Aristotle: what is ouota as
the beingness of beings? Here being means beingness. Expressed at once
therein is this: despite the denial that being has the character of a genus,
nevertheless being (as beingness) is always and only meant as the KOtvOV,
the common and thus what is common to every being.
With the question of beyng, on the other hand, the starting point is
not beings, i.e., this or that given being, nor is it beings as such and as a
whole; instead, what is carried out is a leap into the truth (clearing and
concealing) of beyng itself. Experienced and interrogated here at once is
what essentially occurs in advance (and also lies hidden in the guiding
question), namely, the openness for essential occurrence as such, i.e., truth.
Co-asked here is the pre-question of truth. Inasmuch as beyng is experienced
as the ground of beings, the question of the essential occurrence
of beyng, asked in this way, is the basic question. There is never an immediate,
straightforward progression from the guiding question to the
§34 [76-77] 61
basic question, a progression that would simply be a new application (to
beyng) of the guiding question; instead, there is only a leap, i.e., the
necessity of an other beginning. Nevertheless, through the gradual overcoming
of the posing of the guiding question with its answers as such,
there can and must be created a transition which prepares the other beginning,
makes it visible at all, and allows a presentiment of it. Being and
Time serves to prepare this transition; Le., it already does properly stand
in the basic question, though it does not bring that question to a pure
self-unfolding in an inceptual way.
The answer to the guiding question is the being of beings, the determination
of beingness (Le., the providing of the "categories" for ouota).
Various realms of beings become important in various ways for later,
post-Greek history. The number and the type of the categories as well
as their "system" change, but the approach remains essentially the
same, whether based immediately in Myoc:, ["discourse"] as assertion
or following determinate transformations in consciousness and in the
absolute spirit. From the Greeks to Nietzsche, the guiding question determines
the same mode of asking about "being." The clearest and
greatest example attesting to this unity of the tradition is Hegel's Logic.
For the basic question, on the contrary, being is not the answer or the
realm in which the answer resides, but is what is most question-worthy.
To being is destined the unique appreciation which leaps ahead; Le.,
being itself is opened up as sovereignty and thus is set out in the open as
what cannot be mastered and can never be mastered. Beyng as the
ground in which all beings first come to their truth (sheltering, instituting,
objectivity); the ground in which beings are submerged (abyss); the
ground in which they also claim to be indifferent and self-evident (distorted
ground). The fact that beyng does essentially occur in this manner
of grounding indicates its uniqueness and sovereignty. And that again is
merely an intimation toward the event, wherein we have to seek the essential
occurrence of being in its greatest concealment. Beyng, as what is
most worthy of question, does not in itself know any question.
The guiding question, unfolded in its structure, always allows the
recognition of a basic position toward beings as such, i.e., a position of
the questioner (human being) on a ground which cannot be fath-
0med on the basis of the guiding question and cannot be known at
all but which is brought into the open through the basic question.
Although no progression is ever possible from the guiding question
to the basic question, yet, conversely, the unfolding of the basic question
does at the same time provide the ground for taking back up into
a more original possession the entire history of the guiding question
rather than simply repudiating it as something past and gone (d. The
interplay, 92. The confrontation between the first and the other beginning).
62 1. Prospect [77-78]
35. The event
Meditation on the path:
1. What inceptual thinking is.
2. How the other beginning is carried out as bearing silence.
"The event" would be the right title for the "work" which can only
be prepared here; for this reason, the title must instead be Contributions
to Philosophy.
The "work": the self-developing edifice stemming from a turning
back to the protruding ground.
36. Language and the inventive thinking of beyng
In ordinary language, which is ever more comprehensively used up
today and degraded through idle chatter, the truth of beyng cannot
be said. Can this truth be said immediately in the least, if all language
is indeed the language of beings? Or can a new language be
devised for beyng? No. Even if it could, and perhaps without artificially
formed words, such language would not be one that speaks. All
saying must allow the co-emergence of a capacity to hear it. Both
saying and hearing must be of the same origin. Thus all that matters
is this one thing: to say the most nobly emerged language in its simplicity
and essential force, to say the language of beings as the language
of beyng. This transformation of language presses into realms
which are still closed to us because we do not know the truth of
beyng. Therefore something is said of the "renunciation of pursuance,"
of the "clearing of concealment," of the "appropriating event,"
of "Da-sein"; and this is not a mere plucking of truths out of words
but is the opening of the truth of beyng in this sort of transformed
saying (d. Prospect, 38. Bearing silence).
37. Beyng and its bearing silence16
(Sigetics)
The basic question: how does beyng essentially occur?
16. Cf. conclusion and everything on language in the lecture course, Nietzsches
metaphysische Grundstellung im abendlandischen Denken: Die ewige Wiederkehr des
Gleichen, summer semester 1937 (GA44).
§38 [78-80] 63
Bearing silence is the prudent lawfulness of the silence-bearing
activity (cHY1Xv ["to be silent"]). Bearing silence is the "logic" of philosophy
inasmuch as philosophy asks the basic question out of the
other beginning. Philosophy seeks the truth of the essential occurrence
of beyng, and this truth is the intimating-resonating concealment
(the mystery) of the event (the hesitant withholding).
We can never say beyng itself immediately, especially if beyng is
leaped to in the leap. For every saying arises from beyng and speaks
out of the truth of beyng. All words, and thereby all logic, stand under
the power of beyng. The essence of "logic" (d. s. s. 3417 ) is therefore
sigetics in which the essence of language is first grasped as well.
Yet "sigetics" is a label offered only for the use of those who still
think by "pigeonholing" and who believe they possess knowledge
only if what is said has been categorized.
38. Bearing silence
The expression "sigetics," a foreign borrowing, is meant in correspondence
to "logic" (onto-logy) only as transitionally retrospective and in
no way as part of a mania to replace "logic." Since the question of
beyng and of the essential occurrence of beyng stands, the questioning
is therefore still more original and accordingly can even less be pent up
in an academic pigeonhole and suffocated. We can never say beyng
(event) immediately and therefore not even mediately in the sense of
the heightened "logic" of dialectics. Every saying already speaks out of
the truth of beyng and can never immediately leap over itself to beyng
itself. The laws of bearing silence are higher than those of any logic.
Ultimately, however, bearing silence is not an anti-logic, for the
latter is indeed afortiori a logic and wants to be one but is simply unable
to. On the other hand, the will and knowledge of bearing silence
have a completely different orientation. And just as little does bearing
silence have to do with the "irrational," with "symbols" and "ciphers";
all this presupposes the previous metaphysics. Bearing silence,
however, does include the logic of beingness, just as the basic
question incorporates the guiding question.
Bearing silence arises out of the essentially occurring origin of
language itself.
The basic experience is not the assertion or the proposition. Nor, consequently,
is it the principle, whether "mathematical" or "dialectical."
17. Lecture course, Uber Logik als Frage nach der Sprache, summer semester
1934 (GA38).
64 1. Prospect [80-81]
Instead, it is the holding itself back of restraint. against the hesitant.
self-withholding in the truth (clearing of concealment) of the plight,
from which arises the necessity of the decision (d. Prospect, 46. The
decision).
When this restraint reaches words, what is said is always the event.
But to understand this saying means to carry out the projection and
leap of knowledge into the event. The saying that bears silence is
what grounds. Its word is not by any means merely a sign for something
quite other. What it names is what is meant, but the "meaning"
assigns only as Da-sein, i.e., in thinking and questioning.
Bearing silence and questioning: essential questioning as placing
into decision of the essence of truth.
Seeking after beyng? The original finding in the original seeking.
Seeking-already holding oneself in the truth, in the open realm
of the self-concealing and self-withdrawing. Seeking (originally) as
the basic relation to the hesitant withholding. Seeking as questioning
and yet bearing silence.
The one who seeks has already found! And the original seeking is this
grasping of what has already been found, namely, the grasping of what is selfconcealing
as such.
Whereas ordinary seeking finds in the first place, and has found, when it
stops seeking.
Therefore the original finding is sheltered in the original sheltering precisely
as seeking qua seeking. To honor what is most question-worthy, to abide
in the questioning, steadfastness.
39. The event
That is the essential title for the attempt at inceptual thinking, but
the official title can only be Contributions to Philosophy.
The projection intends what can be willed only in the attempt at
an inceptual thinking which knows a little of itself: to be a conjuncture
[Fuge] of this thinking.
That means:
1. In the construct there is no loosening of the rigor of the structure
[Gefiige], just as if at issue-and this is always at issue in philosophy-
were the impossible: to apprehend the truth of beyng in the
completely developed fullness of its grounded essence.
2. What is allowed here is only the availability [Gefiigung] of one way
an individual can traverse while renouncing the possibility of
overseeing other, perhaps more essential, ways.
§39 [81-82] 65
3. The attempt must clearly realize that both, the structure and the
disposal, remain a dispensation [Fiigung] of beyng itself, of its intimating
and withdrawing of its truth, and not something that can
be obtained by force.
A conjuncture in this threefold sense must be attempted and thereby
also something more essential and more successful (which is bestowed
on the future ones), something from which a leap can be
taken, a leap that is provisionally appended and inserted in order to
be overcome.
This overcoming, provided it is genuine and necessary, certainly
brings about what is greatest: it for the first time brings a thoughtful
attempt to stand historically in its futurity, brings it to stand out into
the future and into inevitability.
The conjuncture is something essentially other than a "system" (d. w.
s. 35-36 and 3618). "Systems" are possible, and toward the end necessary,
only in the realm of the history of the answer to the guiding question.
Each of the six junctures of the conjuncture stands for itself, but
only so as to make the essential unity more impressive. In each of the
six junctures, a saying of the same about the same is attempted, but
in each case out of a different essential domain of that which is called
the event. If one's gaze is superficial and piecemeal, then "repetitions"
will quickly be apparent everywhere. What is most difficult,
however, is to carry out purely and conjuncturally an abiding with
the same and thus testify to a genuine steadfastness in inceptual
thinking. On the other hand, the continuous progression through a
series of constantly different "matters" is easy, because it proceeds of
its own accord.
Every juncture stands in itself, and yet there exists a hidden interweaving
among them and an opening grounding of the site of the
decision for the essential transition into the still-possible transformation
of Western history.
The resonating extends its reach into the having-been and the tocome
and thereby has a power of impact into the present through the
interplay.
The interplay first takes its necessity out of the resonating of the
plight of the abandonment by being.
Resonating and interplay are soil and field for the first run-up of
Inceptual thinking to the leap into the essential occurrence of beyng.
18. Lecture courses, Die Frage nach dem Ding: Zu Kants Lehre von den transzendenlalen
Grundsatzen, winter semester 1935-36 (GA41) and Schelling: aber das Wesen
der menschlichen Freiheit, winter semester 1936 (GA42).
66 1. Prospect [82-83]
The leap first of all opens the untrodden expanses and concealments
of that into which the grounding of Da-sein must penetrate as
belonging to the call of the event.
All these junctures must be endured in such unity, out of that
steadfastness in Da-sein which distinguishes the being of the future
ones.
These take over and preserve the belonging (which is awoken by
the call) to the event and to its turning, and thus they come to stand
before the intimations of the last god.
The conjuncture: the disposal which is compliant [sich fugend] to
the call and which thereby grounds Da-sein.
40. The work of thought in the age of transition
The work of thought in the age of transition (d. Uberlegungen IV, p.
90) can only be, and must be, a course of thought, taking this word
"course" in its two senses at once: a proceeding and the path on
which the proceeding takes place, thus a path that itself proceeds.
Can such a thing be given form in saying, so that the simplicity of
this task comes to light? And to such a thing does there correspond
the conjunction Of the Event? Who may know that? Yet only therefore
is it to be ventured.
Will this attempt some day find an exponent? That is, the one who
can speak of the path that proceeds into, and prepares, what is coming.
But not the one who merely calculates all that is contemporary
about it and thereby "explains"-and ruins-everything.
41. Every saying ofbeyng is couched in words and namings
Every saying of beyng is couched in words and namings which, as
expressions of beyng, are liable to be misunderstood when taken in
the sense of the everyday view of beings and thought exclUSively in
that sense. What this requires is not at all primarily a failure of the
question (within the realm of the thoughtful interpretation of
beyng); rather, the word itself already reveals something (something
familiar) and thereby conceals that which is supposed to be brought
into the open in thoughtful saying.
Nothing can remove this difficulty. Indeed, the attempt to remove
it already signifies a misunderstanding of all saying of beyng. The
difficulty must be accepted and must be grasped in its essential belonging
(to the thinking of beyng).
§42 [83-85] 67
That conditions a stratagem which within certain limits must always
accommodate itself at first to the ordinary meaning and must
proceed in company with that meaning for a while, in order then to
call up at the right moment an inversion of thinking, though one still
under the power of the same word. For example, "decision" can and
should be meant first of all as a human "act," even if not in the moral
sense yet performatively nonetheless, until it suddenly means the
essence of beyng itself-which does not mean beyng is interpreted
"anthropologically" but just the reverse: it means the human being is
placed back into the essence of beyng and is released from the fetters
of "anthropology." Likewise, "machination" is at first a type of human
comportment, and then suddenly and properly it means the reverse:
the essence (distorted essence) of beyng in which the ground of the
possibility of "undertakings" is first rooted.
This "reverse" is not simply a "formal" trick in mere words, whereby
their meaning is turned around; instead, it is the transformation of
human beings themselves.
To be sure, the right grasp of this transformation and especially of
the space of its occurrence (i.e., the grasp of its grounding) is most
intimately interwoven with the knowledge of the truth of beyng.
The transformation of humankind signifies here a change in its
essence, inasmuch as the relation to beings is co-intended in the previously
held interpretation (animal rationale) although it is psychologically
hidden and misinterpreted there and is not grounded and
developed as the essential ground. For that includes "metaphysics"
and the asking of the question of the truth of beyng.
In the thinking of being in its historicality, the essential power of
the negative and of the inversion comes for the first time into a free
domain.
42. From "Being and Time" to "Event"
On this "way," if to keep falling down and getting up can be called a
way, it is always and only the same question of the "meaning of beyng"
that is asked. Therefore the positions of the questioning are constantly
different. Every essential questioning must radically change whenever
it questions more originally. There is no gradual "development" here.
Even less is there that relation of the later to the earlier according to
which the later would already lie enclosed in the earlier. Since everything
in the thinking of beyng is directed toward the unique, to fall
down is, as it were, the norm here! This also rules out the historiological
procedure: to renounce the earlier as "false" or to prove that the
68 1. Prospect [85-86]
later was "already meant" in the earlier. The "changes" are so essential
that their scale can be determined only if in each case the one question
is pervasively asked out of its own site of questioning.
The "changes," though, are not conditioned from the outside, by
objections. For up to now no objection has become possible, since the
question is still not grasped at all. The "changes" arise from the widening
abyss of the question of beyng itself, whereby every historiological
support is withdrawn from this question. As a result, the way
itself certainly becomes ever more essential, not as "personal development"
but as the human exertion (in a completely non-biographical
sense) to bring beyng itself to its truth in beings.
This is merely a repetition of something that since the end of the
first beginning of Western philosophy, i.e., since the end of metaphysics,
has to happen ever more decisively, namely, the fact that the
thinking of beyng must not become a "doctrine" or "system." It must
rather become genuine history and thus what is most concealed.
This occurs for the first time as Nietzsche's thinking; and what
confronts us there as "psychology," as self-dissection and dissolution
and "ecce homo," along with everything contemporary to that desolate
time, has its genuine truth as the history of thinking. In Nietzsche
this thinking still first seeks what is to be thought and still finds it in
the sphere of metaphysical questioning (will to power and eternal recurrence
of the same).
The attempts since Being and Time indeed pose the question more
originally, but everything observes a more humble measure, provided
comparatives are indeed possible here.
The carrying out of the question of being does not admit of any
imitation. Here the necessities of the way are in each case historically
first, because they are historically unique. Whether, seen "historiologically,"
they are "new" and "peculiar" is here not a possible theme
for our judgment.
The historical domination of the history of Western thinking is
becoming ever more essential, and the diffusion of "historiological"
or "systematic" erudition in philosophy ever more impossible.
For the task is not to bring to cognition new representations of beings
but rather to ground the being of the human being in the truth
of beyng and to prepare this grounding in the inventive thinking of
beyng and of Da-sein.
This preparation does not consist in the acquisition of preliminary
cognitions, out of which the proper cognitions are then supposed to
be inferred at a later time. Rather, preparation means here: paving
the way, compelling onto the way-in the essential sense: disposing.
Then again, not as if what is thought and what is to be thought were
§43 [86-87] 69
merely an indifferent occasion for thought to move in some way or
other. Instead, the truth of beyng, the knowledge born of meditation,
is everything.
Yet the way of this inventive thinking of beyng does not already
have a fixed and plotted course on a map of the land. Indeed the land
only first comes to be through the way and is unknown and incalculable
at every point along the way.
The more genuinely the way of inventive thinking is a way to
beyng, the more unconditionally is it determined by beyng itself.
Inventive thinking does not mean thinking up or arbitrarily devising;
instead, it refers to that thinking which, in questioning, stands up
to beyng and challenges beyng to attune the questioning through and
through.
The inventive thinking of beyng must always put beings as a whole
up for decision. That indeed succeeds each time in only one line of
sight and turns out ever more poorly the more the intimation of beyng
strikes home more originally.
The land that comes to be through and as the way of the inventive
thinking of beyng is the between which appropriates Da-sein to the god.
In this appropriation, the human being and god first become "recognizable"
to each other, in their belonging to the stewardship and neededness
of beyng.
43. Beyng and decision
To be needed by the gods and to be shattered by such an elevation-it
is in the direction of this concealment that we must interrogate the
essence of beyng as such. Then we cannot explain beyng as something
apparently supervenient but must apprehend it as the origin,
one which first de-cides and ap-propriates gods and humans.
This interrogation of beyng carries out the opening of the temporal-
spatial playing field of the essential occurrence of beyng: the
grounding of Da-sein.
When we hear talk of "de-cision," we think of a human act, something
carried out, a procedure. What is essential here, however, is
neither the humanness of the act nor the procedural quality.
To be sure, it is scarcely possible to come near the essence of decision
(an essence that belongs to the historicality of beyng) without
starting again with the human being, with ourselves. Then we think
of "decision" as choice, resolution, the preferring of one thing and
the setting aside of another, and we end up with freedom as a cause
and a capacity. We divert the question of decision in the direction of
70 I. Prospect [87-88]
"morals" and "anthropology" and even grasp these latter anewprecisely
with the help of "decision"-in the "existentiell" sense.
The danger of misinterpreting Being and Time in this "existentiellanthropological"
direction and of seeing the connections among
resoluteness, truth, and Dasein on the basis of moral resolution, instead
of doing the reverse, i.e., basing ourselves on the essentially occurring
ground of Da-sein and grasping truth as openness and resoluteness
as the temporalizing spatialization for the temporal-spatial
playing field of beyng-this danger is close at hand and is intensified
by the many issues not mastered in Being and Time. Nevertheless, the
misinterpretation is chiefly kept in check, even if not fully overcome,
by adhering from the start to the basic question of the "meaning of
beyng" as the one and only question.
What is here called de-cision then proceeds to the innermost center
of the essence of beyng itself and thus has nothing in common
with what we understand as making a choice or the like. Instead,
de-cision [Ent-scheidung] refers to the sundering itself, which separates
[scheidet] and in separating lets come into play for the first time
the ap-propriation of precisely this sundered open realm as the clearing
for the self-concealing and still undecided, for both the belonging
to beyng of the human being as the one who grounds the truth of
beyng and the assignment of beyng to the time of the last god.
It is a tenet of the modern era that we think starting with ourselves
and that when we think away from ourselves we always encounter
only objects. We rush back and forth in accord with this
customary way of representation and in its terms explain everything.
Thereby we never wonder whether this way might not allow
for a run-up to the leap through which we first leap into the "space"
of beyng and in this leap reach the decision for us.
Even if we leave behind us the "existentiell" misinterpretation of
"decision," we still face the danger of another misinterpretation, although
today the latter one is, to be sure, especially easy to conflate
with the former.
What has the character of decision, as something pertaining to
the "will" and to "power," could be grasped in its opposition to "system"
by referring to Nietzsche's words: "The will to system is a lack
of integrity" (VIII, 64).19 The clarification of this opposition is by all
means necessary, because decision comes to stand opposed to "system,"
but in a more essential sense than the one in which Nietzsche
saw the opposition. To him, "system" is always the object of "system
19. F. Nietzsche, Gotzen·Diimmerung, in Nietzsche's Werke, Vol. VIn (GroEoktavausgabe),
Leipzig: Kroner, 1919, p. 64.
§43 [89-90] 71
building," of a subsequent classification and ordering. Even if we
Nietzsche a more appropriate understanding of the essence of
system, however, it still must be said that he did not and could not
grasp the essence. The reason is that he himself had to affirm for his
questioning precisely that understanding of "being" (the being of beings)
on the basis of which, and as the unfolding of which, "system"
tuises: to represent the representedness of beings as anticipatory unification
of the objectivity of the object (the essential clarification in
Kant's determination of the transcendental). "Order" and clarity (not
the ordo of the Middle Ages) are only consequences of the "systematic"
not its essence. In the end, it is precisely "system" that belongs to inte,
qrity, not only as its inner fulfillment but as its presupposition. Adrnittedly,
Nietzsche means something else by "integrity," just as he
does not penetrate to the essence of the modern era with his concept
of "system." It is not enough to grasp "system" merely as a peculiarity
of the modern era; that can be correct, and yet the modern era might
still be grasped superficially.
Nietzsche's words about system have then been readily misused as
threadbare justifications of those who lack the power for a thinking
ilble to proceed far in advance and on dark paths. Or at least "system"
has been rejected as a marginal product in favor of a "systematics"
which indeed merely presents the borrowed form of "scientific"
1 hinking for philosophical thinking.
When "decision" comes to stand in opposition to "system," then
the transition from the modern era to the other beginning takes
place. Insofar as "system" contains the essential designation for the
modern concept of the beingness of beings (representedness),
whereas "decision" refers to being [Sein] for beings and not merely
beingness on the basis of beings, then de-cision is in a certain way
"more systematic" than any system, i.e., de-cision is an original determination
of beings as such out of the essence of beyng. In that
case, not only "system building" but also "systematic" thinking are
easily grounded, i.e., grounded on a guaranteed interpretation of beings
over and against the tasks of questioning the truth of beyng and
thinking about de-cision.
At first, however, we think of "decision" as something that occurs
within an "either-or."
It is advisable to prepare the original interpretation (one that belongs
to the historicality of being) of decision by referring to "deci'
lions" that arise out of that de-cision as historical necessities.
All Western thinking has been accustomed for so long (not only in
the modern era) to a superficial view of the human being (as animal
rationale) that it is difficult now to take words and concepts of an
72 1. Prospect [90-91]
apparently fixed anthropological-psychological content and utter
them out of a wholly other truth-and in order to ground that truthwithout
falling victim to the anthropological misinterpretation and
the facile rejoinder that indeed everything is "anthropological." The
cheapness of this objection is so boundless that it must be suspected.
What lies behind it is the fact that one never wants to place the human
being-i.e., oneself-into question, perhaps because one is secretly
not so very sure of the anthropological splendor of mankind.
44. "Decisions"
whether the human being wishes to remain the "subject," or whether
the human being grounds Da-sein;
whether, along with "subject" "animal" is to remain enduringly as
"substance" and "rationale" is to remain as "culture," or whether the
truth of beyng (see below) will find in Da-sein a future abode;
whether beings take being as their "most general" feature and
thereby deliver being up to "ontology" and thus bury it, or whether
beyng in its uniqueness will come to words and will pervasively attune
beings in their non-repeatability;
whether truth as correctness deteriorates into the certainty of representation
and the security of calculation and lived experience, or
whether the initially ungrounded essence of aM8nu comes to be
grounded as the clearing of the self-concealing;
whether beings, as the most self-evident, rigidify everything moderate,
small, and average into the rationaL or whether what is most
question-worthy constitutes the genuineness of beyng;
whether art is an arrangement of lived experience or the settinginto-
work of truth;
whether history is degraded into an armory of confirmations and
precursors or arises as a chain of strange and unscalable mountains;
whether nature is debased into an exploitable domain of calculation
and organization and into an occasion for "lived experience," or
whether, as the self-secluding earth, it bears the open realm of the
pictureless world;
whether the absence of the divine from beings celebrates its triumphs
in the Christianization of culture, or whether the plight of the
undecidability regarding the nearness and remoteness of the gods
prepares a space of decision;
whether humans venture beyng and thereby venture going under,
or whether they content themselves with beings;
§44 [91-93] 73
whether humans still venture a decision at all, or whether they
give themselves over to the decisionlessness which our era proposes
as the state of "highest" "activity."
All these decisions, apparently many and varied, converge on the
one and only decision: whether beyng conclusively withdraws itself,
or whether this withdrawal, as refusal, becomes the first truth and
the other beginning of history.
What is most difficult and most splendid in the decision in favor of
beyng secludes itself through its invisibility. If it ever manifested itself,
it would doubtlessly be misinterpreted and thereby remain well
guarded from every vulgar touch.
Why must decisions arise at all? If they must, then they are necessities
of our era, not only as these determinate decisions but also in
general as decisions.
What is decision here? It determines its own essence out of the essence
of the transition from the modern era into its other. Does decision
thereby actually determine its essence, or is the transition merely
an intimation of that essence? Do "decisions" arise because there
must be another beginning? And must this latter be because the essence
of beyng is itself de-cision and in this unfolding of the essence
bestows its truth for the first time in the history of mankind?
It is incumbent on us to say here, perhaps even at length, what the
words "truth of beyng" do not mean.
The expression does not mean the "truth" "about" beyng and certainly
does not refer to a series of correct propositions about the concept
of beyng or to an irrefutable "doctrine" of beyng. If something
like that could ever be appropriate to beyng (which is impossible), it
would have to presuppose not only that there is a "truth" about beyng
but also and above all the kind of essence pertaining to the truth in
which beyng comes to stand. Yet from where is the essence of this
truth and thereby the essence of truth as such supposed to be determined,
if not from beyng itself? And from it not simply in the sense
of a "derivation" but rather in the sense of a bringing about of this
essence by beyng. That is not something we could have at our disposal
through "correct" opinions about beyng, for it pertains exclusively
to the concealed moments of the history of being.
The expression also does not mean "true" beyng, for instance in the
unclear sense in which we speak of "true," veritable, actual beings. For
here again a concept of "actuality" is presupposed and is the measure
to which beyng is subjected, whereas in fact beyng not only lends to
beings that which they are but also and above all unfolds out of itself,
out of its essence, its own proper truth.
74 L Prospect
This truth of beyng is indeed nothing distinct from beyng but rather
is the most proper essence of beyng. Therefore it depends on the history
of beyng as to whether beyng bestows or refuses this truth and
itself and thus genuinely brings into its history for the first time the
abyssal. The reference to the fact that the usual concepts of "truth" and
the usual non-differentiation of "being" from "beings" lead to a misinterpretation
of the truth of beyng and, above all, already always presuppose
this truth-that reference itself could deteriorate into something
misleading if it permitted this conclusion: what matters here is only to
express the tacit "presuppositions." As if pre-suppositions were graspable
without a previous grasp of the suppositions as such. The recourse
to "presuppositions" and "conditions" is meaningful and justified
within beings and within the interpretation of beings in terms of beingness
in the sense of representedness (and already in the sense of
iSEa). That is why this recourse, in many variations, has become the
basic form of "metaphysical" thinking, so much so that even the overcoming
of "metaphysics" for the sake of a first understanding cannot
dispense with this mode of thought (d. Being and Time and "On the
Essence of Ground" ["Vom Wesen des Grundes"]; here the leap into
beyng is attempted).
As long as "beyng" is grasped as beingness, as in some way the "general,"
and thereby as a condition of beings which is in play behind them,
i.e., as a condition of their representedness, or of their objectivity, or finally
of their being "in-themselves," for so long is beyng itself degraded
to the level of the truth of beings, the correctness of representation.
Because all this is carried out in the purest way in Kant, one can
therefore attempt to make visible in his work something still more
original and thus something not derived from his work, quite different
from it. Yet such an attempt would face the danger of being read
in a Kantian manner once again and misinterpreted as an arbitrary
"Kantianism" and thereby rendered innocuous.
The Western history of Western metaphysics "proves" that the truth
of beyng could not become a question and indicates the grounds of this
impossibility. The crudest misunderstanding of the truth of beyng,
however, would lie in a "logic" of philosophy. For that is the conscious
or unconscious application of the "theory of knowledge" back onto itself.
But the "theory of knowledge" is merely the form taken by the
perplexity of modern metaphysics regarding itself. The confusion culminates
in this "theory of knowledge" pretending to be even a "metaphysics
of knowledge"; calculating on the slide-rule of "aporetics" and of
"aporetic" discussions of "directions" and of "problem-fields" which are
objectively present "in themselves" becomes, indeed with fulljustification,
the method of the most modern philosophical erudition. These are
§44 [94-95] 75
merely the last scions of the process by which philosophy incurs the
loss of its essence and degenerates into the crudest ambiguity, because
what philosophy seems to be can no longer unequivocally be such for
the one who knows. Therefore all attempts to say what the truth of
beyng is not must have become reconciled to the fact that they at most
are supplying new nourishment to the ignorant obstinacy for further
misinterpretation, in case such clarifications are of the belief that distorted
philosophy could be transformed into philosophy by means of
instruction. Nevertheless, meditation (as a historical meditation) on what
the truth of beyng is not is indeed essential because it can help to make
more transparent the basic movements in the basic metaphysical positions
of Western thinking and make more striking the concealment of
the history of being.
To be sure, all of this implies that every rejection of philosophical
bustle possesses its necessity (in the genuine sense of the word) only
if it has recognized that meditation on the truth of beyng contains a
transformation from thinking to thoughtfulness, a transformation
which obviously cannot be brought about by moral directives but,
rather, must be pre-transformed and indeed in the public domain of
what is invisible and makes no clamor.
Why is the truth of beyng not an addition to beyng or framework
for it and also not its presupposition but, instead, the innermost essence
of beyng itself?
The reason is that the essence of beyng essentially occurs in the appropriation
of de-cision. But how do we know that? We do not know
it, but we question into it and through such questioning open up the
site of beyng, perhaps even a site demanded by beyng, in case the essence
of beyng should be refusal, to which the all-too-insufficient
questioning remains the only fitting nearness.
In this way then, for a long time to come all creating that grounds
Da-sein (and only such creating, not the everyday, constant pursuit of
organizing beings) must awaken the truth of beyng as question and
plight, through the most decisive paths and in changing approaches
which are apparently unknown to one another and unconnected.
Such creating must make ready for the stillness of beyng but also
must be decisively against every attempt (in the mere desire to turn
back, even if to the "most valuable" traditions) to confuse and weaken
the unrelenting urgency in the plight of meditation.
Knowledge of the constant mindfulness of what is rare belongs to
the stewardship for beyng, and the essence of beyng shines forth as
the truth itself in the obscurity of the very glowing of that truth.
The truth of beyng is the beyng of truth-said in this way, it sounds
like an artificial and forced reversal and, at most, like a seduction to
76 I. [95-97]
a dialectical game. In fact, this reversal is merely a fleeting and external
sign of the turning which essentially occurs in beyng itself and
which casts light on what might be meant here by "decision."
45. The "decision"
The decision which dawned, already long ago, in the concealed
and dissimulated is the decision regarding history or loss of history.
History: conceived as the playing out of the strife between earth and
world, assumed and performed out of the belonging to the call of the
event as the essential occurrence of the truth of beyng in the form of
the last god.
The decision arises through an experience of the necessity of the
most extreme assignment from the innermost plight of the abandonment
by being and through the empowering of this necessity to constant
power.
The assignment in the light and on the path of the decision is, however,
the sheltering of the truth of the event into the great stillness of beyng
out of the restraint of Dasein.
How does the decision arise? Through the bestowal or withholding of
those eminent and distinctive ones whom we call "the future ones"
in contrast to the multifarious, fortuitous, and countless "later ones"
who have nothing more in front of themselves and nothing more
behind themselves.
Among these distinctive future ones are:
1. Those few single ones who, on the essential paths of grounding Dasein
(poetry-thinking-deed-sacrifice), ground in advance the
sites and moments for the realms of beings. In this way they create
the essentially occurring possibility for the various shelterings of
truth in which Da-sein becomes historical.
2. Those numerous affiliated ones to whom it is given, in virtue of their
understanding of the knowing will and of the groundings of the
single ones, to surmise and to make visible, by carrying them out,
the laws of the re-creation of beings as well as the laws of the preservation
of the earth and of the projection of the world in the
strife between earth and world.
3. Those many who are referred to one another according to their common
historical (earthly-worldly) origin, through whom and for whom
the re-creation of beings and thereby the grounding of the truth of
the event acquire constancy.
4. The single ones, the few, and the many (not taken in terms of their
numbers, but with respect to their distinctiveness) still partially
§45 [97-98] 77
stand in the old, common, and planned orders, which are either
only a shell-like safeguard of the precarious continuance of the
single ones, the few, and the many or the guiding power of their
will.
The agreement among these single, few, and many ones is hidden,
is not fabricated, and grows suddenly and for itself.
This agreement is pervaded by the essential occurrence (different
in each case) of the event, wherein an original gathering is
prepared. In this gathering and as this gathering, that which may
be called a people becomes historical.
5. In its origin and destiny this people is unique, in accord with the
uniqueness of beyng itself, whose truth this people must ground
once and for all in a unique site and a unique moment.
How can this decision be prepared? Do knowledge and will have
a space at their disposal, or would that amount merely to a blind intrusion
into hidden necessities?
Yet necessities shine forth only in a plight. The preparing of a
preparedness for the decision certainly stands in the plight of merely
hastening, in the end, the snowballing lack of history and of hardening
its conditions, whereas this preparing indeed wants the
opposite.
Whoever does not know about this plight cannot surmise a shadow
of the impending decisions.
The decision takes place in stillness. In that way, however, the
destruction of the possibility of decision results afortiori, through the
impending inexorability of the uprooting.
The decision and its necessity and even its preparation remain all
the more difficult to perceive, the more the incidents of "worldhistorical"
revolutions require clamor and the more exclusively all
hearing and listening respond only to the gigantic and loud and
allow everything in the opposite condition, even the great stillness,
to sink into nullity.
The "world-historical" incidents can assume proportions never yet
seen, which at first indicates only the increase in the frenzy within
the unrestrained realm of machinations and number. It never immediately
indicates the rising up of the essential decisions. If, within
these incidents and partially according to their style, a gathering to
itself of the people or of its collectivity is nevertheless established,
could not a way open up here into the nearness of the decision? Certainly,
but at the same time amid the highest danger that the realm
of decision might be completely overlooked.
The decision must create that time-space, the site for the essential moments,
in which the highest seriousness of meditation, in unity with the
78 1. Prospect [98-99]
greatest joyfulness of bestowal, grows into a will to ground and build
but from which also no confusion is far removed. Only Da-sein, never
"doctrine," can bring about a radical change in beings. Such Da-sein, as
ground of a people, requires the longest preparation out of inceptual
thinking; but this latter remains in each case only one way of recognizing
the plight, a recognition that arises simultaneously on many pathways.
Does the decision once again bring about the grounding of the site
of the moment for the sake of the grounding of the truth of beyng, or
does everything simply roll on as "battle" over the bare conditions of
surviving and thriving in gigantic proportions, such that "worldview"
and "culture" are also only supports and resources of this "battle"?
What is prepared then is the transition to the technologized animal, the one
that, through the gigantism of technology, is beginning to replace the
instincts, which are already becoming weaker and coarser.
What characterizes this direction of decision is not the technologizing
of "culture" and the imposition of a "worldview," but is the fact that
"culture" and "worldview" become resources of a battlefield technology
for the sake of a will that no longer wills any goal; for the preservation
of the people is never a possible goal but is only a condition of the setting
of a goal. If the condition turns into something unconditioned, however,
then what comes to power is the not-willing of goals, the cutting
off of all expansive meditation. What then disappears completely is the
possibility of knowing that "culture" and "worldview" are already the
scions of a world-order which presumably is to be overcome. "Culture"
and "worldview" do not lose their character by being brought into political
service, whether they are taken as. values "in themselves" or as
values "for" the people. In either case, meditation, if it is such at all, is
entirely forced into the not-willing of original goals, i.e., a not-willing of
the truth of beyng. Yet only in that truth is a decision reached about the
possibility and necessity of "culture" and "worldview."
Only the most extreme decision out of and about the truth of beyng
still produces a clarity; otherwise, what remains is the persistent twilight
of restorations and of disguises, or even complete collapse.
All these possibilities still presumably possess their lengthy prehistory
in which they still remain unrecognizable and liable to be
misinterpreted.
Yet from where does the plight of future philosophy come? Must not
philosophy itself-in the act of beginning-first awaken this plight?
Such plight stands on this side of distress and worry, which always roam
merely in some corner of established beings and of their "truth." On the
other hand, this plight cannot be removed, or even denied, through the
cheerfulness of presumed amusement over the "wonders" of "beings."
§46 [99-101] 79
This plight, as the ground of the necessity of philosophy, is experienced
through the shock in the jubilation of belonging to being, and
that belonging, in its intimating, brings the abandonment by being
into the open.
46. The decision
(Preliminary concept)
about what? About history or loss of history, i.e., about belonging to
beyng or abandonment in nonbeings.
Why decision; i.e., because of what? Can that be decided?
What is decision anyway? Choice? No; choosing always concerns
only something pre given, something that can be taken or rejected.
Here de-cision means grounding and creating, disposing in advance
and beyond oneself, or else abandoning and losing.
Yet is that not here and everywhere both arrogant and impossible
at the same time? Is it not in concealment that history comes and
goes as it does? Yes and no.
The decision arises in the stillest stillness and has the longest
history.
Who decides? Everyone, even by not deciding and by not wanting
to know about it through an avoidance of the preparation.
What is to be decided? We ourselves? Who are we? In our belonging
and non-belonging to being.
The decision is related to the truth of being, not only related to it
but rather determined by it alone.
What is intended here is thus decision in a preeminent sense, and
that is the reason for speaking about the most extreme decision
which is at once the most intimate.
But this decision is because of what? Because only out of the deepest
ground of beyng itself is there a saving of beings: saving as justifying
preservation of the law and assignment of the West. Must that be?
How does it happen that there is a saving only in this way? Because
the danger has increased to the extreme on account of the uprooting
taking place everywhere and also (which is even more portentous)
because this uprooting is already in the act of hiding itself-in other
words, because the onset of the lack of history is already here.
The decision arises in stillness, not as coming to a resolution but as
the resoluteness that already grounds truth, i.e., re-creates beings and
thus is a creative decision or else is stupor.
Yet why and how preparation of this decision?
80 1. Prospect [101-102]
The battle against destruction and uprooting is only the first step
in the preparation, namely, the step into the nearness of the proper
space of the decision.
47. The essence of the decision: being or nonbeing20
can be determined only out of the essential occurrence of decision itself.
Decision is decision between an either and an or. Thereby, however,
what is proper to decision is indeed already forestalled. Whence
the either-or? Whence the only this or only that? Whence the unavoidability
of this way or else that way? Is there not still a third, indifference?
Nevertheless, here at the extremity, that is not possible.
What is here the extreme: being or nonbeing, and specifically not
the being of some beings or other, such as human beings, but the essential
occurrence of being, or?
Why does it come to an either-or here?
Indifference would merely be the being of non beings, merely a higher
nothingness.
For "being" does not here mean objective presence in itself, and
nonbeing does not here mean complete disappearance. Instead, nonbeing
as a mode of being: it is [Seiend] and yet is not. And likewise
being: permeated with the "not" and yet it is [Seiend].
To take this back into the essential occurrence of being requires
insight into the belonging of nothingness to being, and only in that
way does the either-or receive its sharpness and its origin.
Since beyng is permeated with the "not," for the perseverance of
its truth it needs the persistence of the not and thus also nonbeings,
the counterpart of everything negative.
The essential negativity of being (turning) entails that being requires
and needs that which shows itself in terms of Da-sein as an
either-or, the one or the other, and only these.
The essential occurrence of the decision is the leap into the decision
or else is indifference; thus not withdrawal and not destruction.
Indifference as non-deciding.
The decision is originally about whether there is decision or
non-decision.
Yet decision is bringing oneself before the either-or and thereby is
already decidedness, because here already there is belonging to the event.
The decision about decision (turning). Not reflexivity, but its opposite:
decision about the decision, i.e., already knowing the event.
20. Cf. The leap, 146. Beyng and non-beyng.
81
Decision and question; questioning as more originary: placing the
essence of truth up for decision. But truth itself is already that which
Is to be decided per se.
48. In what sense the decision belongs to beyng itself
The decision and the plight as the unrest of the thrownness [Geworfenheit]
of the projector [Werfer].
The decision and the strife.
The decision and the turning.
*
It seems as if the decision regarding whether to be or not to be is always
already decided in favor of the "to be," since "life" indeed means
wanting to be. Thus nothing at all is up for decision here.
Yet what does "life" mean, and how extensively is "life" grasped
ht:re? As the drive to self-preservation.
Even the common and lowly, the massive and indolent, have a
drive to preserve themselves, and that is precisely what they have.
Consequently, the question of the decision cannot be posed in terms
of such considerations.
49. Why must decisions take place?
Why must decisions take place? What is this: decision? The necessary
form in which freedom is carried out. To be sure; but we are thereby
thinking "causally" and taking freedom as a faculty.
Is "decision" not also still a very refined form of calculation? Or,
on account of this semblance, not only the extreme opposite but even
I.hc incomparable?
Decision, seen as a human activity, as a series of processes.
In decision is the necessary, that which "resides" prior to the "activity"
and reaches beyond the activity.
The temporal-spatial character of decision as the erupting fissure of
beyng itself: to be grasped in terms of the history of being, not morallyanthropologically.
Preparatory clearing away, then precisely not a subsequent
reflexivity, but the reverse.
In general: to rethink-in terms of the history of being (but not
"ontologically")-the whole essence of the human being as soon as it
grounded in Da-sein.

II. THE RESONATING!
1. Cf. lecture course, Einfuhrung in die Metaphysik, summer semester 1935
(GA40); now Uetzt): lecture course, Grundfragen der Philosophie: Ausgewahlte
·Probleme" der "Logik," winter semester 1937-38 (GA45, p. 151ff.); d. also "Die
Begriindung des neuzeitlichen Weltbildes durch die Metaphysik" (in Holzwege
under the title "Die Zeit des Weltbildes"), (GAS).
I
50. Resonating
of the essential occurrence of beyng
out of the abandonment by being
through the compelling plight
of the forgottenness of beyng.
To make appear by way of recollection the concealed power of this
forgottenness as forgottenness and to bring forth therein the resonatof
beyng. The recognition of the plight.
The guiding disposition of the resonating: shock and diffidence, but
t~ach arising out of the basic disposition of restraint.
The highest plight: the plight of the lack of a sense of plight. To let resonate
first of all, whereby much will by necessity remain incomprehensible
and closed to questioning, though indeed a first intimation
will become possible.
What simple course of saying is to be chosen here and followed
without any additional considerations in passing?
The resonating must encompass the entire fissure and, most of all,
must be articulated as the counterplay to the interplay.
For whom is the resonating? And whither? The resonating of the
(~ssential occurrence of beyng in the abandonment by being.
How is this abandonment to be experienced? And what is it? Itself
arisen from the distorted essence of beyng through machination.
Whence this distorted essence? Hardly from the fact that beyng is
permeated with negativity; on the contrary!
What is called machination? Machination and constant presence;
rcO(ll(Jl~ ["making"]-TEXVll ["know-how"]. Whither does machination
lead? To lived experience. How does that happen? (ens creatummodern
nature and history-technology) Through the disenchantment
of beings, which grants power to an enchantment that is carried
(lut precisely by the disenchantment itself. Enchantment and lived
experience.
The final entrenchment of the abandonment by being in the forgottenness
of being.
86 II. The Resonating [108-109]
The age of a complete absence of questioning and an unwillingness
to establish any goals. Mediocrity as status symbol.
The resonating of the refusal-in what sort of sounding?
51. The resonating2
The resonating of beyng as refusal in the abandonment of beings by
being-this already indicates that the task here is not the description,
explanation, or ordering of something objectively present. In
the other beginning of philosophy, the burden of thinking is different:
to think inventively that which eventuates as the event itself, to
bring beyng into the truth of its essential occurrence. In the other
beginning, however, beyng becomes event, and therefore the resonating
of beyng must also be history, must undergo history in an
essential upheaval, must be able to both know and say the moment
of this history. (Knowledge is meant here not in the sense of the labeling
and pigeonholing that would pertain to a philosophy of history
but in the sense of a knowledge of history out of and as the moment
of the first resonating of the truth of beyng itself.)
Yet this way of speaking makes it seem that what matters is only to
designate the present. Let us speak of the age of the complete absence of questioning,
an age whose temporal span stretches beneath time backward
and forward far beyond what happens today. In this age, nothing
essential-supposing this determination still makes sense-is any longer
impossible or inaccessible. Everything "is made" and "can be made,"
if only the "will" to it is summoned up. Yet what is from the start unrecognized
and not in the least questioned is that this "will" is precisely
what has in advance already posited and reduced that which may be
possible and especially that which may be necessary. For, this will which
makes everything has in advance pledged itself to machination, i.e., to
that interpretation of beings as representable and represented. Representable
means, on the one hand, accessible in opinion and calculation
and, on the other hand, providable in production and implementation.
All this is thought on the grounds that beings as such are the represented,
and only the represented is a being. What seems to oppose and
limit machination is, for machination itself, merely material for further
work, an impetus to progress, and an opportunity for expansion and
augmentation. Within machination, there is nothing question-worthy,
nothing that could be deemed worthy through questioning as such,
alone deemed worthy and thereby illuminated and raised into truth.
2. Cf. The Resonating, 72. Nihilism.
[109-1 87
As to "problems," on the other hand, these certainly exist within
machination, indeed in great numbers; they are known as "difficulties"
and are there only in order to be overcome. There are unclarities,
matters not yet clarified, within the representing and pro-ductive way
of explaining. The unclarities are tasks that have not yet been worked
out. There is all this, however, only because machination determines
the beingness of beings, not in the least because machination itself
could be subject to a limit.
Since it is in this way that machination dispels and eradicates question-
worthiness and brands it as downright deviltry, and since this
destruction of question-worthiness, even in the age of the complete
absence of questioning, is perhaps at bottom not fully possible, therefore
this age is still in need of that which allows-in the manner
proper to the age, i.e., machinationally-some validity to what is worthy
of question and yet at the same time makes it innocuous. That is
the accomplishment of lived experience: all this becomes a "lived experience'"
an ever greater, ever more unprecedented, and ever more loudly
proclaimed "lived experience." "Lived experience," understood here as
the basic form of representation belonging to the machinational and
the basic from of abiding therein, is the publicness (accessibility to
everyone) of the mysterious, i.e., the exciting, provocative, stunning,
i:1ild enchanting-all of which are made necessary by what is machinational.
The age of the complete absence of questioning tolerates nothing
questionable and destroys all solitude. Precisely in this age, therefore,
talk must circulate that "creative" persons are "solitary"; accordingly,
everyone is informed of the solitude of these loners and is
opportunely instructed, in "picture and sound," of their doings. Here
meditation touches on the uncanniness of this age and knows itself
to be far from every sort of facile "critique of the times" and "psychology."
For what matters is to know that here, in all barrenness and
frightfulness, something of the essence of beyng is resonating and
the abandonment of beings (as machination and lived experience) by
beyng is dawning. This age of the complete absence of questioning
can be overcome only by an age of that simple solitude in which a readiness
for the truth of beyng itself is prepared.
52. The abandonment by being
is strongest where it is most decisively hidden. And that is where beings
have become-and must have become-the most ordinary and most
usual. This happened for the first time in Christianity and its dogmatics,
88 II. The Resonating [llO-l
according to which every being is explained in its origin as ens creatum,
the creator is what is most certain, and beings are the effect of this
cause which is most eminently. The cause-effect relation, however, is
the most common, rudimentary, and nearest, which all human calculation
and lostness in beings have recourse to in order to explain something,
i.e., to place it into the clarity of the common and usual. Here,
where beings must be the most usual, beyng is by necessity what is
afortiori ordinary and indeed the most ordinary.
Yet now in truth beyng "is" the least ordinary, and thus beyng has
here entirely withdrawn and has abandoned beings.
The abandonment of beings by being: the fact that beyng has
withdrawn from beings, and beings have first of all (through Christianity)
become mere things made by another being. The supreme
being, as cause of all beings, took over the essence of beyng. These
beings, formerly made by a creator God, then became the dominion of
humanity, inasmuch as beings are now taken only in their objectivity
and come under human domination. The beingness of beings
thereby fades into a "logical form," into what is thinkable by a thinking
which is itself ungrounded.
Humans are so dazzled by objectivity and machination that beings
are already withdrawing from them; and withdrawing even more
are beyng and its truth, wherein all beings must originally arise
anew and appear strange, in order for creating to receive its great
impetuses and to create.
Abandonment by being: the fact that beyng is abandoning beings,
is leaving them to themselves, and thus is allowing them to become
objects of machination. All this is not simply "decline," but is the first
history of beyng itself, the history of the first beginning and of what
stands in the lineage of that beginning, as well as the history of what
is thereby necessarily left behind. Yet even this that is left behind is
no mere "negativum"; rather, in ending, it makes appear for the first
time the abandonment by being, assuming that the question of the
truth of beyng is posed out of the other beginning and thus initiates
the encounter with the first beginning.
Then it is clear: the abandonment of beings by being means that
beyng conceals Uselfin the manifestness of beings. And beyng itself is
essentially determined as this self-withdrawing concealment.
Beyng is already abandoning beings when aA~ena becomes the
withdrawing basic character of beings and thereby prepares the determination
of beingness as tOEa. Beings then allow beingness to
have validity only as something supplemental, which to be sure must
become the npon:pov ["first"] and the apriori on the level of measuring
up to beings as such.
fIl2-113] 89
The most trenchant proof for this concealed essence of beyng (for
the self-concealing in the manifestness of beings) is not simply the
degrading of beyng into the commonest and emptiest. The proof lies in
the entire history of metaphysics, for which beingness must become
precisely the most well known and must even become what is most
certain in absolute knowledge, until finally, in Nietzsche, it is a neces~
ary semblance.
Do we grasp this great lesson of the first beginning and of its history:
the essence of beyng as refusal and, in the greatest manifestness
of machinations and of "lived experience," as the most extreme
refusal?
Do we future ones have an ear for the sound of the resonating
which must be made to sound forth in the preparation of the other
beginning?
The abandonment by being: it has to be experienced as the basic
occurrence of our history and brought into the knowledge which
configures and leads the way.
And that requires:
I. a remembrance of the abandonment by being in its long, hidden,
self-hiding history. It is not enough to refer to the here and now;
. an experience of the abandonment by being equally as the plight
which protrudes over into the transition and makes it our access to
what is coming. The transition as well must be experienced in its
entire breadth and in its many rifts (on this, d. Oberlegungen IV, p.
96).
53. Plight
Why does the word "plight" immediately make us think of "lack,"
"{~vil," something unfavorable? It is because we value freedom from
plight as a "good," and indeed we are correct to do so when at issue are
well-being and prosperity. For these depend entirely on an unbroken
mpply of useful and enjoyable things, things already objectively present,
ones which can be increased through progress. Progress has no
future, however, because it merely takes things that already are and
f~xpedites them "further" on their previous path.
When at issue is that to which we belong, that toward which we
iHt' hiddenly compelled, then what about "plight"? That which compels,
and is retained without being grasped, essentially surpasses all
"progress," for that which compels is itself what is genuinely to come
il nd thus resides completely outside of the distinction between good
and evil and withdraws itself from all calculation.
90 II. The Resonating [113-1
Can we (Who?) once again be accorded such a compulsion? Would it
not have to aim at a complete transformation of the human being? Could
it be something less than the inevitable in what is most alienating?
54. The abandonment by being
includes the forgottenness of being and likewise the breakdown of truth.
Both of these are basically the same. Nevertheless, in order to
make compelling the abandonment by being as a plight. each of
them must separately be brought to meditation, so that the greatest
plight. the lack of a sense of plight in the midst of this plight, might break
through and might make resound for the first time the most remote
nearness to the absconding of the gods.
Is there a stricter proof of the abandonment by being than the fact
that the human masses, who revel in the gigantic and its contrivances,
are not even deemed worthy of finding annihilation by the
shortest route? Who surmises in such denial the resonating of a god?
What would happen if for once we wanted to be serious, withdrew
from all fields of semblant "cultural activity," and admitted that no
necessity reigns there any longer? Would not a plight then appear,
come to power, and be compelling? Toward what and for what? That
is difficult to say. Yet it would indeed be a plight and a ground of necessity.
Why do we no longer possess the courage for this retreat? Why
does it immediately strike us as something of no value? The reason is
that for a long time we have been content to seem to pursue culture
and are unwilling to renounce such semblance, because as soon as
even that is taken away, not only would the necessity of action disappear
but also action itself.
Yet whoever is now still a creator must have already carried out
this retreat completely and encountered that plight in order to take
up in the most intimate kind of experience the necessity of the transition
(i.e., to be a transition and a sacrifice) and to know that this is
precisely not renunciation and giving up for lost but. to the contrary,
is the power of clear decidedness as the harbinger of the essential.
55. Resonating
Out of the plight of the forgottenness of being: the resonating of the truth
of beyng and of the essential occurrence itself of beyng. The inception
of this plight from its depth as lack of a sense of plight. The forgottenness
§55 [114-115] 91
o/being does not know anything of itself; it supposes itself to be in touch
with "beings," with the "actual," to be close to "life," and to be certain
of "lived experience," since the forgottenness of being knows only beings.
Yet in this way, in such presencing of beings, they are abandoned
by being. The abandonment by being is the ground of the forgottenness of
being. The abandonment of beings by being gives them the appearance
that they themselves, without needing anything else, are now there to
be grasped and used. But the abandonment by beyng excludes and
precludes the event.
The resonating must sound out of this abandonment and must
start with the unfolding of the forgotten ness of beyng, in which the
other beginning resounds and so does beyng.
Abandonment by being
What Nietzsche for the first time recognizes as nihilism, in fact in
the guise of Platonism, is in truth, seen in terms of the basic question
that remains foreign to him, merely the surface of the much deeper
occurrence of the forgottenness of being. This forgotten ness becomes
more and more prominent precisely in the pursuit of an answer to
the guiding question. Yet even the forgottenness of being (in each
case according to how it is determined) is not the most original destiny
of the first beginning; rather, that is the abandonment by being,
which perhaps was most veiled and denied by Christianity and its
secularized successors.
That beings can still appear as such, though the truth of beyng has
abandoned them-d. the disempowerment of cpucn<; and ov as U5€a.
To what extent are beings used up when, thus abandoned by
being, they appear as objects and as the "in itself"? Note the obviousness,
flattening, and downright unrecognizability of beyng in the
prevalent understanding of being.
Abandonment by being
What is abandoned by what? Beings by the beyng which belongs to
them and to them alone. Beings then appear in that way, namely as
objects and as things objectively present, as if beyng were not occurring
essentially. Beings are the nondescript and the striking at the
same time, in the same undecidedness and arbitrariness.
The abandonment by beyng is basically an essential decay [Verwesung]
of beyng. Its essence is distorted and only in that way does it
bring itself into truth, namely, as the correctness of representationvO£
lv ["thinking"]-Olavo£lv ["thinking through"]-iO€a. Beings remain
what is present, and what most properly is is what is constantly
92 II. The Resonating [115-117]
present and thus conditions everything; it is the un-conditioned, the
ab-solute, the ens entium, Deus, etc.
What sort of happening, and of which history, is this abandonment?
Is there a history of beyng? And how seldom and how little
does this history come to light in a veiled way?
The abandonment by beyng happens to beings and indeed to beings
as a whole and thereby also to that being which, as human,
stands in the midst of beings and, in so doing, forgets their beyng.
Through a disclosure of the abandonment by being, the resonating
of beyng seeks to bring back beyng in its full essential occurrence as
event. That bringing back will happen only if, through the grounding
of Da-sein, beings are placed back into beyng as opened up in the
leap.
56. The continuance of the abandonment by being in the hidden
mode of the forgottenness of being
To this forgottenness of being, however, there corresponds the prevalent
understanding of being; i.e., the former is as such first completed
and hidden to itself through the latter. For this prevalent understanding,
what is incontestably true about beyng is:
1. its universality (the "most general," d. ib£<X-KOIVOV-Y£Vl']
["genera"]);
2. its obviousness (unproblematic, since the emptiest and containing
nothing questionable).
Here, however, beyng is never experienced as such but is always
grasped only in the horizon of the guiding question, i.e., in the horizon
of beings: ov n QV and thus in a certain sense rightfully as what is
common to all (namely, to beings as "actualities" and as things objectively
present). The mode in which here, within the horizon of the
guiding question, beyng must be encountered and taken up is at the
same time attributed to beyng as its essence. Yet this is indeed only
one mode of a very problematic grasp within a still more problematic
con-cept [Be-gnff].
The innermost ground of historical uprootedness is an essential
ground, grounding in the essence of beyng: the fact that beyng is
withdrawing from beings and yet lets them appear as what "is" and
even as what "is more eminently."
Since this deterioration of the truth of beyng is carried out especially
in the most graspable forms of the communication of truth, in
apprehension and knowledge, therefore the converse holds: if the
uprootedness is to be overcome through a new rootedness, genuine
§56 [117-118] 93
knowledge and specifically knowledge of beyng itself must come to
reign here. In that case, what is again first is to apprehend radicallywhich
primarily means to question into-precisely that essence of
beyng, namely, the abandonment by beyng.
Wherein the abandonment by being announces itself:
1. The complete insensibility to the ambiguity in that which is held to be
essential; ambiguity as effecting an incapacity and unwillingness
to carry through actual decisions. For example, everything
that is meant by a people: the communal, the racial, the inferior and
lower, the national, the permanent; or, for example, everything
called "godly."
2. The disappearance of the knowledge of what is a condition, what
is conditioned, and what is unconditional. Idolizing, raising to the
level of the unconditioned, the conditions of historical beyng, for
instance, of the ethnic with all its ambiguity.
3. The remaining caught up in the thinking and establishing of
"values" and "ideas"; therein, without any serious questioning,
the structural form of historical Dasein is seen as if it were in something
unalterable; corresponding to all this is "worldview" thinking.
(Cf. The interplay, llO. The iO£a, Platonism, and idealism.)
4. As a consequence, everything is incorporated into a concern
with "culture," and the great decisions such as Christianity are
not set forth radically but are avoided instead.
5. Art comes under the subjection of cultural utility, and its essence
is mistaken; blindness to its essential core, to its way of grounding
truth.
6. Altogether characteristic is the misestimation with respect to the
unfavorable and the negative. These are simply thrust aside as
"evil," misinterpreted, and thereby diminished; and in this way
their danger is increased all the more.
7. Therein appears-quite distantly-ignorance regarding the belonging
of the not, of the occurrence of negativity, to beyng itself;
total unawareness of the finitude and uniqueness of beyng.
8. That is accompanied by ignorance of the essence of truth; unawareness
that, prior to everything true, truth and its grounding
must be decided; blind mania for "what is true" with a semblance
of serious willing (d. Oberlegungen IV, p. 83).
9. Accordingly, the rejection of genuine knowledge and the dread
of questioning; the avoidance of meditation; flight into incidents
and machinations.
lO. All stillness and restraint appear as inactivity, as leaving alone,
and as renunciation but are in fact perhaps the most extensive
overflow back into the letting be of being as event.
94 II. The Resonating [118-119J
II. The self-certainty of no longer letting oneself be called; the obduracy
against all intimations; the inability to always only
calculating.
12. All of these are merely emanations from an intricate and obdurate
dissimulation of the essence of beyng, especially of its fissure:
the fact that uniqueness, rarity, momentariness, contingency
and befalling, restraint and freedom, preservation and
necessity do pertain to beyng, which is not the emptiest and
most common, but the richest and highest. Moreover, beyng essentially
occurs only in the appropriating eventuation, in virtue
of which Da-sein achieves a grounding of the truth of being in a
sheltering through beings.
13. The particular clarification of the abandonment by being as the
foundering of the West; the absconding of the gods; the death of
the moral, Christian God; the reinterpretation of this God (d.
Nietzsche's comments). The veiling of this uprootedness by the
groundless, though supposedly newly begun, self-discovery of
mankind (modernity); this veiling glossed over and increased by
progress: discoveries, inventions, industry, machines; at the
same time: mass society, desolation, impoverishment, everything
as detachment from the ground and from orders; uprootedness
but at bottom a veiling of the plight, incapacity to meditate,
impotence of truth; progression to nonbeings as ever greater
abandonment by beyng.
14. The abandonment by being is the innermost ground of the plight
of the lack of a sense of plight. How can this plight be made effective
as a plight? Must one not allow the truth of beyng to shine
forth-but to what end? Who of those needless ones is able to
see? Is there ever a way out of such a plight which constantly
denies itself as a plight? The will to get out is lacking. Can the
recollection of past possibilities of Da-sein lead to meditation here?
Or must something extraordinary, unimaginable, be thrust into
this plight?
15. The abandonment by being, made closer to us through a meditation
on the darkening of the world and on the destruction of the
earth in the name of speed, calculation, and the claim of the massive
(d. The resonating, 57. The history ofbeyng and the abandonment by
being).
16. The simultaneous "reign" of both the powerlessness of mere attitude
and the brutality of institutions.
§58 [119-121] 95
57. The history of beyng and the abandonment by being
The abandonment by being is the ground and thereby at the same
time the more original determination of the essence of that which
Nietzsche was the first to recognize as nihilism. Yet how little did he
and all his power succeed in compelling Western Dasein to meditate
on nihilism! Accordingly, the hope is even less that our era might
summon up the will to know the ground of nihilism. Or is this
knowledge first supposed to clarify the "fact" of nihilism?
The abandonment by being determines a unique era in the history
of the truth of beyng. It is the era of beyng of the long duration in
which truth hesitates to put its essence into clarity. The time of the
danger that every essential decision passes by, the time of the renunciation
of the battle over measures.
Decisionlessness as the realm of the unboundedness of machinations,
where size spreads to the monstrous proportions of the gigantic
and the transparency of what is empty passes for clarity.
The long hesitation of truth and decisions is a withholding of the
shortest path and of the greatest moments. In this era, "beings" (that
which we call the "actual," "life," "values") are dis appropriated ofbeyng.
The abandonment by being is cloaked in the increasing authority
of calculation, speed, and the claim of the massive. The obstinately distorted
essence of the abandonment by being is hidden away under
this cloak, and it makes the abandonment unassailable.
58. The three ways the abandonment by being cloaks itself:
What they are and how they appear
1. Calculation-first placed in power through the machinations of
technology, which are epistemologically grounded in mathematics;
here unclear anticipation in rules and guiding principles,
hence the certainty of governing and of planning, the experiment;
without questioning, one makes it through some way or other;
nothing impossible, one is certain of "beings"; the question of the
essence of truth is no longer needed; everything has to conform to
the current state of calculation; on that basis the priority of organization,
renunciation of a freely developing change from the ground
up; here the incalculable is merely that which has not yet been mastered
in calculation but which in principle will also be incorporated
some day; therefore in no way is anything outside all calculation; in
96 II. The Resonating [121-122]
"sentimental" moments, which indeed are not seldom under the
"domination" of calculation, there is concern over "destiny" and
"providence" but never such that, from what is thus appealed to, a
formative power could emerge and could manifest the mania for
calculation in its proper limits.
Calculation is meant here as a basic law of comportment, not as
the mere deliberation or even the cleverness of an individual act;
these latter pertain to all human proceedings.
2. Speed-of every sort; the mechanical increase in technical "velocities,"
and such increase altogether only a consequence of this
speed; the latter the inability to withstand in the stillness of concealed
growth and of waiting; mania for the surprising, for what
is again and again immediately and differently "striking" and enthralling;
transience as the basic law of "constancy." Necessary:
prompt forgetting and losing oneself in what comes next. On this
basis, then, the erroneous representation of the high and the
"highest" in the monstrous form of record-breaking performances;
purely quantitative increase, blindness to the truly momentary,
which is not the transient, but is what opens up eternity. With
respect to speed, however, the eternal is the mere endurance of
the same, the empty "and so on and on"; the genuine unrest of the
battle remains concealed, and in its place has stepped the restlessness
of constantly more ingenious activity, which is pushed forward
by the dread of becoming bored with oneself.
3. The burgeoning of the massive. This expression does not simply allude
to the "masses" of "society"; those masses have become prominent
only because number already reigns, as does the calculable, i.e.,
what is accessible to everyone in the same way. What is common to
the many and to all is what the "many" see as overarching; that accounts
for the tendency to calculation and speed, just as, conversely,
these in turn place the massive in its tracks and its framework. Here
the most acute-because most inconspicuous-opposition to the
rare and the unique (the essence of being). Everywhere in these
ways of cloaking the abandonment by being, the distorted essence
of beings, in the guise of nonbeings, becomes more and more diffuse
and indeed in the semblance of a "great" occurrence.
The diffusion of these ways in which the abandonment by
being is cloaked and indeed the diffusion of this abandonment
itself are the strongest-because at first quite unnoticeable-obstacle
to the correct assessment and grounding of the basic disposition
of restraint, in which the essence of truth first shines forth
insofar as the displacement into Da-sein happens.
§58 [122-123] 97
Yet those modes of sojourning amid beings, and the modes in
which beings are "dominated," are so undermining because they do
not allow themselves to be simply cleared away one day as apparently
mere outer forms that enclose something inner. Those modes
insert themselves in the place of the inner and ultimately deny the
distinction between an inner and an outer, since they themselves
claim to be the first and the only. To this corresponds the way knowledge
is attained as well as the calculated, speedy, massive dissemination,
to as many as possible in the shortest possible time, of bits of
erudition that are not at all understood; "schooling" ["Schulung"]: a
word which in its current meaning turns the essence of school and
of crXOA~ ["leisure"] upside down. Yet this, too, is only a new sign of
the upheaval which does not halt the increasing uprootedness, because
this upheaval does not reach the roots of beings. Nor does it
want to reach them, for it would have to encounter there its own
groundlessness.
To calculation, speed, and the massive, there comes to be allied
something further which is related to all three and takes over
in an emphatic way the disguising and cloaking of the inner disintegration.
This is:
4. the denuding, the making public and common, of every disposition. To the
devastation this creates, there correspond both the greater lack of
genuineness in every attitude and, as one with that, the debilitation
of words. A word is then merely a sound and a noisy excitation,
in which a "meaning" can no longer be intended, because
every concentration of possible meditation has been taken away
and meditation is altogether disdained as something strange and
impotent.
All this becomes so much more uncanny the less obtrusively it
plays out and the more self-evidently it takes possession of the
everyday and is, so to speak, covered over by new institutional
forms.
The consequences of the denuding of the dispositions, which is
at the same time a cloaking of the expanding emptiness, appear
ultimately and precisely in the incapacity to experience what is
genuinely happening, the abandonment by being, as a disposing
plight-presuming this abandonment could indeed, within certain
limits, be shown.
5. All these signs of the abandonment by being point to the inception
of the era of the complete unquestionableness of all things and of all
machinations.
98 II. The Resonating [I
Not only is it denied in principle that anything could be concealed;
more decisively, self-concealment as such is in no way admitted
as a determining power.
In the era that is completely unquestioning, however, "problems"
will indeed accumulate and will follow one upon the other.
Those kinds of "questions" will accumulate which are not questions
at alL since their answer can be nothing binding, inasmuch
as the answer immediately becomes a new problem. Precisely this
claims in advance: there is no problem that is not solvable, and the
solution is merely a matter of number applied to time, space, and
force.
6. Now, however, since beings have been abandoned by beyng, there
arises an occasion for the most trite "sentimentality." Now for the
first time everything is a matter of "lived experience," and all undertakings
and affairs drip with "lived experiences." And this concern
with "lived experience" proves that now even humans themselves,
as beings, have incurred the loss of their beyng and have
fallen prey to their hunt for lived experiences.
59. Bewitchery and the era of complete unquestionableness
We are used to calling the era of "civilization" the one that has dispelled
all bewitchery, and this dispelling seems more probably-indeed
uniquely-connected to complete unquestionableness. Yet it is just the
reverse. We merely need to know where the bewitchery comes from,
namely, from the unbridled dominance of machination. When machination
attains ultimate dominance, when it pervades everything, then
there are no more circumstances whereby the bewitchery can be
sensed explicitly and resisted. The hex cast by technology and by its
constantly self-surpassing progress is only one sign of this bewitchery
that directs everything toward calculation, utility, breeding, manageability,
and regulation. Even "taste" now becomes subject to this regulating
and is entirely a matter of being "high class." The average becomes
better and better, and thanks to this betterment the average
secures its dominance ever more irresistibly and unobtrusively.
It would of course be illusory to conclude that the higher the average,
the more surpassing becomes the height of above-average accomplishments.
Such a conclusion is itself a revealing sign of how calculation
permeates this attitude. The question is whether any space at all is
still needed for the above-average, or whether satisfaction with averageness
does not become ever more reassuring and justified, even to
the point of persuading itself that it has already accomplished-and
§61 [124-126] 99
could immediately accomplish at will-what the above-average claims
to offer.
The constant raising of the average level and the concurrent widening
and wide application of this level, until it becomes the platform
for all activity, constitute the most uncanny sign of the vanishing of
the decisive places; it is a sign of the abandonment by being.
60. Whence the lack of a sense of plight as the greatest plight?
The lack of a sense of plight is greatest where self-certainty has become
unsurpassable, where everything is held to be calculable, and especially
where it has been decided, with no previous questioning, who
we are and what we are supposed to do. This is where the knowledge
has been lost (and never was properly grounded) that genuine selfhood
occurs in a grounding beyond oneself, which requires the grounding
of a grounding space and of its time. And such grounding requires a
knowledge of the essence of truth as that which must be known.
Where "truth" has long since ceased to be a question, however,
and even the attempt at such a question is dismissed as a disturbance
and as inconsequential musing, there the plight of the abandonment
by being has no time-space at all.
Where the possession of what is true as what is correct is beyond
question and directs all actions and omissions, what is the question
of the essence of truth still supposed to accomplish?
And where this possession of what is true can even cite actual
deeds, who would still want to stray into the uselessness of a questioning
of an essence and be exposed to ridicule?
The lack of a sense of plight is due to this obstructing of the essence
of truth as the ground of Da-sein and of the grounding of history.
61. Machination 3
ordinarily means a "bad" kind of human endeavor and the scheming
that goes into it.
In the context of the question of being, it does not name a kind of
human conduct but a mode of the essential occurrence of being. The
pejorative connotation should also be avoided, even if machination
does promote the distorted essence of being. Yet even this distorted essence
itself, since it is essential to the essence, is never to be depreciated.
3. Cf. The resonating, 70 and 71. The gigantic.
100 II. The Resonating [126-127]
Instead, the name machination [Machenschaft] should immediately
refer to making [Machen] (rroll1Gt<;, T£XVl1), which we assuredly know as
a human activity. This latter, however, is itself possible precisely only
on the grounds of an interpretation of beings in which their makeability
comes to the fore, so much so that constancy and presence become
the specific determinations of beingness. The fact that something makes
itself by itself and consequently is makeable in a corresponding operation:
the making itselfby itself is the interpretation of cpUGt<; carried out in
terms of T£XVl1 and its outlook on things, in such a way that now already
the emphasis falls on the makeable and the self-making (d. the relation
between i()£a and T£XVl1), which is called, in brief, machination. Since
cpUGt<; is starting to lose its power at the time of the first beginning,
machination does not yet step into the light of day in its full essence. It
remains veiled in the concept of constant presence, which is determined
as £vn:A£XEta ["consummation"] at the apex of primordial Greek
thinking. The medieval concept of actus already covers over the primordial
Greek essence of the interpretation of beingness. Connected to this
is the fact that the machinational now thrusts itself forward more
dearly and that, through the coming into play of both the JudeoChristian
thought of creation and the corresponding representation of
God, ens becomes ens creatum. Even if a crude interpretation of the idea
of creation is foregone, the fact that beings are caused remains essential.
The cause-effect connection comes to dominate everything (God as
causa sui). That is an essential deviation from cpUG1<; and is at the same
time the transition to the emergence of machination as the essence of
beingness in modern thought. The mechanistic and the biologistic
modes of thinking are always only consequences of the concealed
machinational interpretation of beings.
Machination as the essential occurrence of beingness provides a
first intimation of the truth of beyng itself. We know little enough of
machination, despite its dominating the history of being in the previous
Western philosophy, from Plato to Nietzsche.
It seems to be a law of machination (the ground of this law is still
unfathomed) that the more prescriptively machination unfoldsthus
in the medieval period and in the modern era-all the more
obstinately and machinationally does it conceal itself as such: in the
Middle Ages behind the ordo and the analogia entis, in modernity behind
objectivity as the basic form of actuality and thus of beingness.
To this first law of machination, a second is joined: the more decisively
machination conceals itself in this way, all the more does it
press toward the predominance of that which seems completely opposed
to its essence and yet is of its essence, i.e., toward lived experience
(d. everything on lived experience in "The resonating").
§62 [127-129] 101
And so, a third law fits in: the more lived experience is unconditionally
prescriptive for correctness and truth (and thereby for "actuality"
and constancy), all the more hopeless does it become that from
here a knowledge of machination as such could be acquired.
The more hopeless this unveiling, the more unquestioned are beings
and the more decisive becomes the antipathy toward the questionworthiness
of beyng.
Machination itself withdraws, and thus beyng itself withdraws,
since machination is the essential occurrence of beyng.
Yet what if, out of all this (which is to every appearance merely
adverse and deprivational), there arose a quite different insight into
the essence of beyng and beyng itself unveiled itself as refusal or
even brought itself to resonate?
If machination and lived experience are named together, that indicates
an essential belonging of the two to each other but at the same
moment conceals an equally essential non-simultaneity within the
"time" of the history of beyng. Machination is the early-but for a
long while to come, still concealed-distorted essence of the beingness
of beings. Yet even when machination takes definite forms, as in modernity,
and shows itself in the popular interpretation of beings, it is
not recognized as such and certainly is not grasped. On the contrary,
the expansion and entrenchment of its distorted essence are carried
out in such a way that machination explicitly draws back behind that
which seems to be its extreme opposite and yet which completely and
utterly remains under its domination. And that is lived experience.
The belonging of the two to each other can be grasped only through a
return to their most disparate non-simultaneity and through a dispelling
of the semblance of their extreme oppositionality. If thoughtful
meditation (as questioning of the truth of beyng and only as this)
achieves knowledge of such belonging, then at the same time the basic
thrust of the history of the first beginning (the history of Western metaphysics)
is already grasped out of a knowledge of the other beginning.
Machination and lived experience constitute as a formula the more original
version of the one expressing the guiding question of Western
thought: beingness (being) and thinking (as representational grasping).
62. The disguising of the abandonment by being
through machination and "lived experience," a disguising
which belongs to that abandonment itself
1. The belonging of machination and lived experience to each other.
2. Their common root.
102 II. The Resonating [129-130]
3. To what extent they complete the disguising of the abandonment
by being.
4. Why Nietzsche's recognition of nihilism could not be grasped.
5. Once the abandonment by being is recognized, what does it reveal
about beyng itself? The origin of the abandonment by being.
6. Which paths are necessary in order to experience the abandonment
by being as plight?
7. To what extent does that require the transition to the overcoming?
(Da-sein)
8. Why, for this transition, does HOlderlin's poetry first become futural
and thereby historical?
63. Lived experience
To relate beings as the represented to oneself as the relational center
and thus to incorporate them into "life."
Why the human being as "life" (animal rationale) (ratio-representation!).
What can count as actually "being" is only what is or can be the
object of a lived experience, what presses forth in the realm of lived
experience, what humans can bring to themselves and before themselves.
64. Machination
ouoia (T£XVT]-TroiT] 01<;-is£a)
constant presence
ens ereatum I nature
history
causality and objectivity
representedness
lived experience
§66 [130-131]
65. The distorted essence of beyng
beingness as
mac h ina t ion and correctness I
~ essential occurrence of beingness I
lived experience
103
abandonment by being 1--------------,
(
lack of a sense of plight
resonating of the essential occurrence of beyng
in the abandonment by being
machination ---------+. lived experience
~ ~
refusal I entrenchment
bewitchery
I bewitchery I
66. Machination and lived experience
by essence know no limits and especially no impasses and utterly no
shyness. Farthest from them is the power of preservation, whose
place is taken by exaggeration, out-yelling, and mere blind screaming,
in the wail of which one crows over oneself and deludes oneself
in order to escape the hollowness of beings. To machination and
lived experience, in accord with their lack of limits and impasses,
everything is open and nothing impossible. They must see themselves
everywhere and as the enduring, and thus nothing is so ordinary
to them as the "eternal." Everything is "eternal." And is the
eternal-this eternal-not also supposed to be the essential? Yet if it
is such, what could still be named as opposed to it? Can the negativity
of beings and the abandonment by being be preserved better and
more surely in the mask of "true actuality" than through machination
and lived experience?
"Lived experience"
What is lived experience?
104 II. The Resonating [131-132]
To what extent in the certainty of the ego (predelineated in a specific
interpretation of beingness and truth).
How the emergence of lived experience promotes and entrenches
the anthropological way of thinking.
To what extent lived experience is an end (because it unconditionally
confirms "machination").
67. Machination and lived experience
Machination as the sovereignty of making and of the realm of what
is made. Yet that is not to be thought of in the sense of human activity
and busyness and their management; on the contrary, such activity,
in its unconditionality and exclusivity, is possible only on the
basis of machination. "Machination" is the name for a specific truth
of beings (of the beingness of beings). We grasp this beingness first
and foremost as objectivity (beings as objects of representation), but
machination, since it is related to T£XVl1, grasps this beingness more
profoundly, more primordially. Machination includes at the same
time the Christian-biblical interpretation of every being as an ens creatum,
whether this is now taken in a religious or secular sense.
The emergence of the machinational essence of beings is historically
very difficult to grasp, because that essence has been in effect
basically since the first beginning of Western thought (more precisely,
since the collapse of &:A~e£t(X).
The step taken by Descartes is already a first consequence, the
decisive one, the effective one, whereby machination comes into sovereignty
as a transformed truth (correctness), i.e., as certainty.
The machinational essence in the form of ens as ens certum is to be
shown first. In the course of the overcoming of metaphysics, the certum
must be interpreted on the basis of the machinational and
thereby the latter must be decisively determined.
Further consequences: the mathematical and the system and, in
unity with them, "technology."
"Lived experience" stands in long withheld, and now finally emerging,
correspondence to machination (rroll101<;-T£XVl1-K1Vl1o1<; ["motion"]
-vou<;).
Both names designate the history of truth and of beingness as the
history of the first beginning.
What does machination mean? That which is released to its own
fettering. What are the fetters? The schema of thorough and calculable
explainability, whereby everything draws equally close
together to everything else and becomes completely foreign to itself,
§68 [132-134] 105
indeed altogether other to itself and not just foreign. The relation of
unrelatedness.
68. Machination and lived experience
What, in its extreme oppositionality, is thereby recognized in its belonging,
in a belonging that itself first indicates that which we still do not
grasp because the truth of this true occurrence is as yet ungrounded?
Yet we can meditate on this that belongs and thereby remain ever
further from every sort of self-gaping "situational" analysis.
How machination and lived experience (in a way which is as such
hidden at first and for a long time, indeed still hidden up to this hour)
reciprocally drive each other to the extreme and thereby extend the
deformations of beingness, and of humans in their relation to beings
as well as to themselves, into their most extreme abandonment; and
how, in these deformations, they now mutually drive toward each
other and create a unity which all the more conceals what is eventuating
in it: the abandonment of beings by every truth of beyng and,
in the end, even by beyng itself.
This event of the abandonment by being would be miSinterpreted,
however, if one were to see in it merely a process of decline instead of
considering that it proceeds through its own unique modes of disclosing
beings and disclosing their "pure" objectification in determinate,
apparently background less, and altogether groundless appearing. The
emerging of the "natural," the appearing of the things themselves, to
which certainly belongs that semblance of having no ground. This
that is "natural" no longer possesses, of course, an immediate relation
to <pUOH;; instead, it is utterly posited on the machinational. On the
other hand, it is prepared by the erstwhile predominance of the supernatural.
This discovery of the "natural" (ultimately, of what can be
made and dominated and given in lived experience) must one day
exhaust itself of its own riches and become entrenched in an ever
bleaker mixture of previous possibilities, so much so that this attitude
of merely continuing the same and of imitating knows itself, and can
know itself, less and less for what it actually is. Therefore it believes
itself to be all the more creative the more it pursues its ending.
The coming together of machination and lived experience contains
a peculiar event within the hidden history of beyng. Yet there
is no sign anywhere that the present era has the least knowledge of
it. Or must it remain closed to this era and become the truth, the
resonating of the truth of beyng, only to those who are already in the
transition?
106 II. The Resonating [134-135]
69. Lived experience and "anthropology"4
The fact that "anthropology" is still today-or even again-made the
center of worldview dogmatics shows, more convincingly than any historiological
proof of lines of dependence, that mankind is once more
endeavoring to place itself back completely on the Cartesian foundation.
Whether anthropology is dressed in an enlightened/moral,
psychologica lInatural-scientific, human -scien ti fic/personalistic, Christian,
or politicallethnic coiffure is a matter of utter indifference for the
decisive question, i.e., for the question of whether the modern era is
grasped as an end and another beginning is sought, or whether the decline
that has been in effect since Plato is perpetuated and insisted on,
which ultimately can still happen only through the conviction that
one's lack of any presentiment is in fact an overcoming of the tradition.
It is thereby quite in order if the lack of a presentiment (not to say:
lack of responsibility) extends so far that someone might put on airs
claiming to have overcome the Cartesian philosophy, while at the
same moment no contemporaries surmise anything of this play of the
lack of presentiment. Just as at the time of neo-Kantianism, however,
the current history of the age did not recognize the still quite considerable
learning and careful work that was done, so today's age of "lived
experience" will make even less of a fuss with respect to this boring
and commonplace mock-up of its own superficiality.
70. The gigantic5
At first we must take our bearings from what is closest and characterize
the gigantic, too, as something objectively present at hand, in order
to let resound at all the abandonment by being and thus the predominance
of the distortion (as machination) of <pUGH;. As soon as machination
for its part is grasped in terms of the historicality of being, however,
the gigantic reveals itself as "something" else. It is no longer the
representable object of something "quantitative" without limit; instead,
it is quantity as quality. Quality is here meant as the basic character
of the quale, of the "what," of the essence, of beyng itself.
4. What is lived experience! How its reigning leads to the anthropological way
of thinking! How lived experience is an end, because it unconditionally confirms
machination.
S. Cf. machination.
§70 [135-136] 107
We know quantity-quality, rrocrov-rrOlov, as "categories," i.e., in
relation to "judgment."
Yet it is not a matter here of a changeover of one category into another,
a "dialectical," intrinsically representational mediation of the
forms of representation, but is instead a matter of a change in the history
of being itself.
This latter "changeover" is prepared by the determination of beingness
on the basis of t"EXVl1 and iOEa. To represent and to bring before
oneself involve the "how wide" and "how far," i.e., the characters of
distance in relation to beings as ob-jects, even if no definite spatial
things or relations are thought of.
Representation, as systematic, turns this di-stance [Ab-stand], as
well as its overcoming and securing, into the basic law of the determination
of objects. The project of representation, in the sense of an
anticipating, planning, organizing grasp of everything, before everything
is already grasped in particulars and individuals, this representation
finds no limits in what is given and seeks to find none. Instead,
the limitless is decisive, not as what flows by or is merely "more of
the same" but as bound by no limit of the given, by nothing that is, or
could be, given as a limit. In principle, nothing is "im-possible"; indeed,
that term is "hated." That is to say, everything is humanly possible,
as long as everything is calculated in every respect and in advance
and the conditions are provided.
Thus we can already see that it is not a matter of a changeover of
the "quantitative" into the qualitative but is a matter of recognizing
the original essence of the quantitative and of the possibility of its
representation (calculability) in the essence of the reigning of both
representation as such and the objectifying of beings.
We can thereby see again that, on account of their "self-consciousness,"
those who carry out the unfolding of representation (of the
world as picture) know nothing of this essence of the quantitative
and thus also nothing of the history which prepares and completes
the reigning of the quantitative.
And, furthermore, nothing at all of the fact that the abandonment
of beings by being is completed in the gigantic as such, i.e., in the appearance
of that which lets all beings be most eminently.
The "quantitative" is treated quantitatively, i.e., calculated, but at
the same time the claim is made that through determinate principles
it is placed in its limits and subjugated.
That is why still today, and indeed today more than ever before,
space and time cannot be conceived otherwise than as quantitative,
at most as forms of these quantities. And to think even of time-space
as something completely non-quantitative strikes us as a strange and
108 II. The Resonating [136-138]
unreasonable demand. One extricates oneself by indicating that here
the word "time," e.g., is carried over to something else.
The quantitative (quantitas) can appear as a category because it is
basically the essence (distorted essence) of beyng itself, but this latter
is at first sought only in the beingness of beings, with beings understood
as the present and constant.
That the quantitative becomes quality therefore means that although
the distorted essence of beyng is not recognized in its essential
belonging to the essence of beyng, yet such recognizability is
indeed prepared through the knowledge, pertaining to the historicality
of being, that the quantitative dominates all beings. The reason
it does nevertheless not appear as beyng is that representation, in
which the essence of the quantitative is grounded, as such adheres
immediately and constantly to beings and sequesters itself against
beyng or, which amounts to the same thing, at best allows beyng
"validity" as the most general (of representation), the emptiest.
Grasped historically, the gigantic as such is primarily the incalculable.
The latter, however, is the announcement (ungraspable from
the overly close nearness) of beyng itself, but in the form of the plight
of the lack of a sense of plight.
Why does the gigantic not know overabundance? It is because the
gigantic arises out of the hiding of a lack and gives this hiding the
semblance of an untrammeled publication of a possession. Since the
gigantic never knows over-abundance (what is in-exhaustibly unexhausted),
it must also be denied the simple. For essential simplicity
arises out of fullness and its domination. The "simplicity" of the gigantic
is mere semblance, which is supposed to hide the emptiness.
Yet by instituting all these semblances, the gigantic is unique and is
in accord with its own essence.
71. The gigantic
According to the tradition (d. Aristotle on rrocrov), the essence of the
quantum lies in its divisibility into parts which remain the same as it
in kind.
What then is quantitas? What is the quantitative? And in what
sense is the gigantic the quantitative as something qualitative? Can
that be grasped on the basis of the traditional determination of the
quantum?
"Parts of that same kind," and "division" [Teilung], division and distribution
[Ein-teilung] (calculating-A6yo~, distinguishing-gathering).
Distribution and instituting [Ein-richtung]?
§72 [138-139] 109
Instituting and representation?
Quantum (according to Hegel, the sublated and now indifferent
quality) includes alterability of the "what," without this "what"
thereby becoming sublated.
Quantity and quantum (a magnitude-something of such and such a size).
-l-
Quantity-way of having size, having great or little size.
72. Nihilism
means, in Nietzsche's sense, that we lack all goals. Nietzsche is referring
to the goals that increase in themselves and that change the
human being (Whither?). Thinking in terms of "goals" (the long
misunderstood TEAOC; ["end"] in the Greek sense) presupposes the
ib£a and "idealism." Therefore, this "idealistic" and moral interpretation
of nihilism remains provisional, despite its essentiality. In aiming
at the other beginning, nihilism must be grasped more fundamentally
as an essential consequence of the abandonment by being.
Yet how can this abandonment come to be known and decided, if
what Nietzsche already once experienced and thought through as
nihilism has remained ungrasped to this day and, above alL has not
compelled meditation? The very form in which Nietzsche expressed
himself contributed to the fact that his "theory" of "nihilism" was
taken to be an interesting cultural psychology. But the truth of his
"theory" was already warded off with a sign of the cross, i.e., outspokenly
or tacitly shunned as diabolical. For, so runs this self-evident
consideration, where would it lead us if that were true or became
true? And no one surmises that precisely this consideration-or, rather,
its underlying attitude and comportment toward beings-is the genuine
nihilism: the unwillingness to acknowledge the lack of goals.
And so one suddenly "has goals" once again, even if merely what can
possibly serve as a means for the erection and pursuit of goals is itself
elevated into a goal: the people, for example. Therefore precisely
where one believes one again has goals, where one is again "fortunate,"
where one proceeds to making equally available to all "people"
the "cultural assets" (movies and trips to the beach) that were
closed off to "most" -precisely here, in this noisy intoxication with
"lived experience," resides the greatest nihilism, the deliberate turning
of a blind eye to human goal-Iessness, the "ready to wear" avoidance
of any goal-setting decision, the dread of all decisive domains
and of their opening. The dread of beyng was never as great as it is
today. Proof: the gigantic arrangements aimed at out-screaming this
110 II. The Resonating [139-141]
dread. The essential determinant as regards "nihilism" is not whether
churches and monasteries are destroyed and people are murdered or
whether this ceases and "Christianity" is allowed to go its way. Instead,
what is determinant is whether one knows or even wants to
know that precisely this tolerance shown to Christianity, and Christianity
itself, as well as the loose talk of "providence" and the "Lord
God," no matter how sincere the individuals may be who speak thus,
are mere ways of escape and mere predicaments in that domain one
does not wish to acknowledge or give validity to as the decisive domain
regarding beyng or non-beyng. The most fateful nihilism consists
in one's posing as a defender of Christianity and even claiming,
on the basis of social accomplishments, to be the most Christian of
Christians. The entire danger of this nihilism resides in the fact that
it is utterly concealed to itself and is contrasted, sharply and justifiably,
against what could be called crude nihilism (e.g., Bolshevism).
Yet the essence of nihilism is indeed so abyssal (since nihilism
reaches down into the truth of beyng and into the decision about this
truth) that precisely these most oppositional forms can and must belong
to it. Therefore it also seems that nihilism, calculated as a whole
and in a fundamental way, cannot be overcome. If the two extreme
oppositional forms of nihilism battle each other, and indeed necessarily
in the most strident manner, then this battle will lead in one
way or another to the victory of nihilism i.e., to its renewed entrenchment
and presumably in such a form as to rule out the very notion
that nihilism is still at work.
Beyng has so radically abandoned beings and left them to machination
and "lived experience" that all "cultural politiCS" and those
apparent attempts at saving Western culture must necessarily become
the most insidious form of nihilism and thereby its highest
form. This is not a process tied to individuals and to their actions and
teachings; instead, it merely propels the inner essence of nihilism
into the purest form assigned to it. To be sure, meditation on this
already requires a standpoint from which neither is any illusion possible
regarding the many "goods" achieved, the "progress," and the
"gigantic" accomplishments, nor indeed can utter despair emerge,
which only has not yet closed its eyes to the complete senselessness.
This standpoint, which grounds space and time anew for itself, is Dasein,
on whose ground beyng itself first comes to be known as refusal
and thus as appropriating event. The preparation for overcoming nihilism
is paved by the basic experience that the human being, as the
one who grounds Da-sein, is needed by the godhood of the other god.
What is most inescapable and most difficult in this overcoming is the
knowledge of nihilism.
§73 [141-142] III
This knowledge should not adhere either to Nietzsche's words or
to his first clarification of what he meant; instead, it must recognize
the abandonment by being as the essence.
73. "Science" and the abandonment by being6
1 n truth, the modern science of today does not at all immediately
touch the field of decision regarding the essence of beyng. Why then
does reflection on "science" nevertheless belong to the preparation
for the resonating?
The abandonment by being is the inceptually pre-formed consequence
of the interpretation of the beingness of beings under the
guideline of thinking and of the thereby conditioned early collapse of
&:A~e£ta (which never was explicitly grounded).
Now, however, because in the modern era, and as the modern era,
truth is fixed in the form of certainty and certainty is fixed in the form
of an immediately self-conscious thinking of beings as represented objects,
and because the establishment of these fixed forms constitutes
the foundation of the modern era, and also because this certainty of
thinking unfolds in the instituting and pursuit of modern "science,"
the abandonment by being (i.e., at the same time, the suppression of
&A~eEla all the way to its smothering and forgotteness) is essentially
codetermined by modern science, yet indeed only inasmuch as the latter
claims to be a-or even the-normative knowledge. That is why a meditation
on modern science and its machinationally rooted essence is
unavoidable within an attempt at indicating the abandonment by
being as the resonating of beyng.
This implies at the same time that such meditation on science is
still, philosophically, the only possible one, assuming that philosophy
is already moving in the transition to the Other beginning. Every kind
of (transcendental) laying of foundations that stems from a theory of
science has become as impossible as a "meaning-conferral" which assigns
an ethnic-political or any other anthropological purpose to the
objectively present (and, in its essential content, thereby unalterable)
science and its pursuit. These "foundation-layings" have become impossible
because they necessarily presuppose "science" and then
merely provide it with a "foundation" (which is not really such) and a
meaning (which has not been meditated on). Thereby, "science" and
along with it the entrenchment (which science pursues) of the abandonment
by being are now merely made ever more definitive, and all
6. Cf. The resonating, 76. Propositions about "science."
112 II. The Resonating [142-143]
questioning of the truth of beyng (i.e., all philosophy) is excluded from
the realm of action as having no necessity and no urgency. But precisely
this holding back of the (inner) possibility of any meditative
thinking, as thinking of beyng, is now compelled all the more-since
it is ignorant of what it is doing-to mix up a concoction of "worldviews"
composed of indiscriminately adopted forms of thought, as
well as means and areas of thought, from the previous metaphysics. It
is then supposed to improve on past philosophy. And in all this, it is
compelled to behave "subversively." But in this "subversion" (which
comes down to a mere enshrinement of truisms), all that deserves to
be called "revolutionary" is simply the unsurpassable disrespect shown
to the great thinkers. To be sure, reverence for them is something
other than mere praise and a recognition of their worth "for their own
time," in case someone might cite such instances.
Meditations on "science" which are to be recorded in a series of
directive propositions must for once release that name [Wissenschaft]
from the historical indeterminacy of its arbitrary identification with
E1nOT~I.I1'l, scientia, science [in English in the text] and must instead
determine it on the basis of the modern essence of science. At the
same time, the degradation (which takes hold in science) of the appearance
of knowledge (as preservation of the truth) must be made
clear, and science must be followed up all the way to the apparatuses
and institutions (today's "university") which necessarily belong to its
machinational essence. In order to characterize the essence of this
science, insofar as we focus on the relation to "beings," we can take
direction from the now common distinction between historiological
and experimental-exact sciences, although this distinction (as well
as the one derived from it between "natural" and "human" sciences)
is merely superficial and in reality is only a poor veiling of the unitary
essence of these sciences which appear to be basically different.
This meditation is not at all meant to be a description and clarification
of these sciences; rather, it must aim at what they carry out and
what is carried out in them, namely, the entrenchment of the abandonment
by being or, in short, the absence of truth in all science.
74. "Total mobilization"
as a consequence of the original abandonment by being
The mere setting in motion and undermining of all previous contents
of still-enduring formations.
The priority of procedures and contrivances in the totality of the rallying
of all the masses and pressing them into service-toward what end?
§76 [143-145] 113
What does this priority of mobilization signify? The necessary forcing
into existence of a new type of human being is merely a counterresult
of this occurrence, never its "goal."
But are there still "goals"? How does the positing of goals arise?
Out of the beginning. And what is a beginning?
75. Concerning the meditation on science
Today there are two, and only two, ways of meditating on "science."
The first does not grasp science as the current objectively present
institution but, rather, as one determinate possibility of unfolding and
constructing a knowledge whose essence is itself rooted in a more
original exposition of the ground of the truth of beyng. This exposition
of the ground is carried out as a first confrontation with the beginning
of Western thought and becomes, at the same time, the other
beginning of Western history. Such meditation on science proceeds
back into something past just as decisively as, risking everything, it
reaches out toward something to come. It in no way moves within a
discussion of something present and of its immediate achievements.
Calculated with respect to the present, this meditation on science gets
lost in what is not actual, which at the same time also means, for all
calculation, what is not possible (d. "The self-assertion of the German
university" [Die Selbstbehauptung der deutschen UniversitiitF).
The other way, the one to be delineated in the following directive
propositions, grasps science in its current actual constitution. This
meditation attempts to grasp the modern essence of science according
to the strivings which appertain to that essence. As meditation,
however, it does not merely describe an objectively present state of
affairs but rather exposes a procedure insofar as that procedure leads
to a decision regarding the truth of science. This meditation is guided
by the same standards as the first, and in relation to the first it is
merely the other side of the coin.
76. Propositions about "science"B
1. "Science" must always be understood in the modern sense. The
medieval doctrina and the Greek £maT~}ll1 are radically different
from it, even if, in a mediated and altered way, they co-determine
7. Rectoral address 1933 (GA16).
8. Cf. Modern science.
114 II. The Resonating [145-146]
what we recognize as "science" today and also what we can alone
pursue as "science" in conformity with our historical situation.
2. Accordingly, "science" itself is not knowledge (Proposition 23) in
the sense of a grounding and preserving of an essential truth.
Science is a derived instituting of knowledge, i.e., a machinational
showcasing of a domain of correct findings within an otherwise
concealed region of truth (about "nature," "history," "law," etc.),
a region which for science is by no means worthy of question.
3. What is "scientifically" knowable is in every case pre-given "to science"
in a "truth" about some known region of beings, a "truth"
that can never be grasped by science itself. Beings, as a region, are
something available for science; they are a positum, and every science
(even mathematics) is in itself "positive" science.
4. Therefore "the science" does not exist ever or anywhere, versus,
for example, "art" and "philosophy," which in each case are in
themselves what they essentially and fully are when they are
historical. "Science" is merely a formal title, and an essential understanding
of that title requires us to keep in mind the scientifically
characteristic, organizational compartmentalizing of science
into special-i.e., separate-sciences. Thus, just as every
science is "positive" science, it must also be a "special" science.
5. "Specialization" is not at all a sign of the deterioration and ruin
of "the" science, nor even an unavoidable evil resulting from
progress, from unsurveyable expansion, and from the division of
labor. Instead, it is a necessary, intrinsic consequence of the character
of the sciences as special sciences and is an inalienable condition
for their continued existence, i.e., always, for their progress.
Where lies the genuine reason of the compartmentalizing?
In beingness as representedness.
6. Every science, even a "descriptive" one, is explanatory: what is
unknown in the region is connected, by being led back in various
modes and over various distances, to something known and
already understood. The provision of the explanatory conditions
constitutes the investigation.
7. According to the way this that is already understood and the
claim to understandability determine in advance the region of
the specific science, the nexus of explanation is formed and is delimited
as sufficient for the respective case (e.g., the explanation
of a painting from a physical-chemical viewpoint, the explanation
of the objectivity of the painting from a physiological-psychological
viewpoint, the explanation of it as a "work" from a
"historiological" or "artistic" viewpoint).
[146-147] U5
8. The organizing of knowledge (knowledge of an essential truth
experienced in advance) (d. Proposition 2) is carried out as the
building up and building out of an explanatory nexus whose
possibility requires the thorough binding of the investigation to the
respective subject area and indeed from the viewpoint into
which the latter is shifted. This binding of the sciences as institutings
of nexuses of correct findings is what constitutes the rigor
proper to them. Every science is in itself rigorous according to
the way it must be "positive" and the way it must individuate itself
through the respective viewpoint it adopts toward its respective
area.
9. The development of the rigor of a science is carried out in the
"method," i.e., in the way of approach (the adopting of a point of
view on the subject area) and the way of proceeding (the execution
of both the investigation and the presentation). The way of
approach brings the domain of objects in each case into a determinate
direction of explainability, one which as a matter of principle
already assures the inevitability of a "result." (There is always
some finding.)
The basic procedure in all explanation is the pursuit and anticipatory
establishment of individual series and chains of continuous
cause-effect relations. The machinational essence of beings, although
not recognized as such, does not merely justify but even
requires in an increase without limit this thinking in "causalities"
which is assured of results. These "causalities," strictly speaking,
are merely "if-then" relations in the form of "when this-then that"
(here also belongs the "statistics" of modern physics, which in no
way overcomes "causality" but simply brings to light its machinational
essence). The opinion that "living things" can more readily
be grasped with this apparently "free" causality simply reveals the
hidden basic conviction that even what is alive will one day be
placed within the jurisdiction of explanation. This step lies all the
closer in view of the fact that on the side of the region opposite to
nature, i.e., in history, what predominates is the purely "historiological"
or "pre-historiological" method which thinks entirely in
terms of causality, makes "life" and any "lived experience" accessible
to causal calculation, and therein alone sees the form of historical
"knowledge." The admission that "accident" and "destiny"
are co-determinative in history is all the stronger evidence of the
exclusive dominance of causal thinking, inasmuch as "accident"
and "destiny" do present cause-effect relations, ones which
merely resist precise and univocal calculation. Historiology could
ll6 II. The Resonating [147-149]
never recognize that historical beings might possess a completely
different mode of being (one grounded on Da-sein), because historio]
ogy would then have to renounce itself (on the essence of history,
d. Oberlegungen VI, pp. 33ff., 68f., 74f.). For, as science, historio
logy possesses for its pre-established operational domain that
which is obvious, that which unconditionally conforms to an average
intelligibility, and this intelligibility is demanded by the essence
of science as the instituting of correct findings within the
domination and regulation of all objects for the sake of their usefulness
and breeding.
10. Insofar as the only task appropriate to "science" is the complete
investigation of its subject area, science is intrinsically drawn to
giving ever-greater precedence to the approach and the procedures
versus the subject area itself. The decisive question for science as
such is not the determination of the essential character of the beings
themselves from which a subject area is derived; instead, the
question is merely whether this or that procedure can lead to a
"finding," i.e., to a result of the investigation. What is dominant is
the focus on the provision and instituting of "results." The resultsand
of course their immediate appropriation into use-guarantee
the correctness of the investigation, and this scientific correctness
then counts as the truth of an act of knowledge. Science must seek
confirmation of its own necessity precisely in its appeal to "results"
and their usefulness. (In essence, it makes no difference whether "science"
thereby justifies itself as a "cultural value," or as "service to
the people," or as "politicized science," for which reason then all
justifications and "meaning-conferrals" of this kind blend into one
another and demonstrate more and more that they belong together
despite the apparent antagonism.) Only a thoroughly modern (i.e.,
"liberal") science can be "people's science." Only modern scienceon
the basis of its giving precedence to procedures over the matter
and to correctness of judgments over the truth of the beings-allows
the needs of the moment to regulate its switching over to various
goals (the effectuation of strict materialism and technicism in
Bolshevism; the deployment in the four-year plan; the use of science
for political education). "Science" is here in all respects the
same, and precisely through the adoption of these various goals it
becomes ever more uniform, i.e., "international."
Because "science" is not knowledge but, instead, the instituting
of correct findings within a region of explanation, then from
the adoption of new goals the "sciences" also necessarily undergo
in each case new "stimulation," with the help of which they can
at the same time talk themselves out of every possible threat
§76 [149-150] 117
(viz., every essential one) and can pursue their research with
ever more "reassurance." Thus it now needed only a few years
until it became clear to "science" that its "liberal" character and
its "ideal of objectivity" are not only perfectly compatible with a
political-ethnic "alignment" but are actually indispensable to
that. Therefore it must be admitted unanimously, on the part of
"science" just as much as on the part of "worldview," that talk of
a "crisis" of science was in fact mere babble. The "ethnic" as well
as the "American" "organization" of science are both moving on
the same path, and the question is simply on which side lie the
greater means and powers for a speedier and complete disposability
in order to drive the unchanged, and not self -alterable, essence
of modern science to its extreme end-state. That "task"
might still claim hundreds of years and will ever more definitively
exclude any possibility of a "crisis" of science or, in other
terms, any essential transformation of knowledge and truth.
ll. Every science is rigorous, but not every science is "exact science." The
concept of "exact" is ambiguous. In general, the word means: precise,
meticulous, careful. In that sense, every science demands
"exactness," i.e., carefulness in applying the method so as to adhere
to the rigor intrinsic to the very essence of science. But if "exact" is
taken in the sense of calculated, measured, and determined numerically,
then exactness is a character of a method itself (indeed
already a character of the proposal) and is not merely a way of applying
a method.
12. If "exactness" signifies the measuring and calculating procedure
itself, then the proposition holds: a science can be exact only because
it must be rigorous.
13. But a science must be exact (in order to remain rigorous, i.e., to
remain science) if its subject area is determined in advance as a
domain (the modern concept of "nature") accessible solely to
quantitative measurement and calculation and only thus guaranteeing
results.
14. The "human sciences," on the other hand, must necessarily remain
inexact in order to be rigorous. That is not a deficiency; it is
their merit. The carrying out of the rigor of the human sciences
is thereby always much more difficult than the carrying out of
the exactness of the "exact" sciences.
15. Every science, as positive and individual science, relies for its
rigor on cognizance of its subject area, on inquiry into that area,
on Ell1t€lpia: ["experience"] and experimentum in the widest sense.
Even mathematics requires experientia, the simple cognizance of
its simplest objects and of their determinations in axioms.
llS II. The Resonating [150-152]
16. Every science is an inquiry that investigates, but not every science
can be "experimental" in the sense of the modern concept
of experiment.
17. On the other hand, measuring (exact) science must be experimental.
"Experimentation" is a necessary and essential consequence of
exactness; in no way is it because a science experiments that it is
exact (d. The resonating, 77, regarding experiri, experimentum,
and "experimentation" as a way of arranging research in the modern
sense).
18. The modern counterpart to "experimental" science is "historiology,"
which draws from "sources," along with its derivative form
of "pre-historiology." It is perhaps the latter which allows us the
most penetrating insight into the essence of all historiology,
namely, that it never reaches the level of history.
All "historiology" is nourished by the act of comparison and
serves to expand the possibilities of comparison. Although comparison
seems to aim at differences, yet for historiology differences
never become a decisive distinction, i.e., never become the
uniqueness of the unrepeatable and the simple, in the face of
which historiology (in case it could ever be brought face to face
with this) would have to acknowledge itself insufficient. The unrecognized
foreboding that its own essence is threatened with negation
by history is the innermost reason that historiological
comparison grasps differences for the sole purpose of placing
them in a broader and more complex domain of comparability.
Yet all comparing is essentially an equalizing, i.e, a relating back
to something one and the same, and this something does not at
all come to be known explicitly. Instead, it constitutes what is
obvious, and from it all explaining and relating derive their clarity.
The less that historiology encounters history itself and the
more that it records, calculates, and presents mere actions, works,
productions, and opinions as incidents in their succession and
difference, the easier can historiology then satisfy its own rigor.
The fact that it always moves within this domain is most clearly
demonstrated by the way the historiological sciences "progress."
This way consists in the respective-and in each case differently
caused-exchanging of the viewpoints that guide the comparison.
The discovery of so-called new "material" is always the consequence,
not the motive, of the newly chosen viewpoint from
which an explanation is carried out. Moreover, there can be
times which seem to exclude all "interpretations" and "presentations"
and to limit themselves purely to the securing of the
"sources." These latter themselves are then designated as the
§76 [152-153] 119
genuine "findings." Yet even this very securing of "findings" and
of what can be found passes over immediately and necessarily
into an explanation and thus involves the adoption of a guiding
viewpoint. (The crudest process of assigning and incorporating
of a finding into already acquired findings is an explanation.)
In the course of the development of historiology, the material
does not merely expand and become more surveyable and also,
on account of refinements in the way the material is organized,
more readily and reliably accessible. Furthermore, and above all,
the material in itself becomes more constant, i.e., it remains
more constantly the same throughout changes in the viewpoints
adopted toward it. Historiological work thereby becomes ever
easier, since it can be carried out simply by applying a new interpretative
viewpoint to already acquired material. Historiology
itself, however, never introduces the interpretative viewpoint;
instead, historiology always merely reflects the current history
in which the historiologists stand but which they themselves precisely
cannot know historically and in the end must simply once
again explain historiologically. The exchanging of interpretative
viewpoints then guarantees for a longer time an abundance of
new discoveries, and this in turn confirms historiology itself in
the self-certainty of its progress and entrenches it even more in
its avoidance of history. But if some particular interpretative
viewpoint is elevated into the only definitive one, then historiology
finds in this clarity of the guiding viewpoint a further means
to raise itself above the previous historiology with its changing
viewpoints and to bring this constancy of its "research" into the
long-desired correspondence with the "exact sciences" and thereby
to become "science" in the genuine sense, which shows itself by
historiology becoming business-like and "institutionalized" (perhaps
in correspondence to the organizations of the Kaiser Wilhelm
Society). This consummation of historiology into a secure
"science" is by no means contradicted by the fact that its main
accomplishment is carried out henceforth in the form of newspaper
reports (news coverage) and that historiologists have become
gluttons for such presentations of world history. Indeed, "newspaper
science" is already, and not accidentally, coming into being.
It is still seen as a deviation from historiology, if not actually a
degeneration, but in truth it is merely the latest anticipation of the
essence of historiology as a modern science. To be noted is the
inevitable coupling of this "newspaper science," in the broad
sense, with the publishing industry. Both, in their unity, stem
from the essence of modern technology. (Therefore as soon as
120 II. The Resonating [153-154]
"Humanities Departments" ["Philosophische Fakultat"j have once
been decisively converted into that which they already are, then
newspaper science and geography will become the basic sciences
of those "departments," whose inner atrophy, which is clear everywhere,
is merely a consequence of the waning courage to resolutely
cast off this semblant philosophical character and to give
the business-like character of the future "human sciences" full
room to institute itself.)
Although, in relation to the "human sciences," theology is differently
determined with respect to "worldview," yet purely with
respect to its operation, which is in service to its determination as
a science, it is much more advanced than they are. Consequently,
it is quite in order if the department of theology is indeed placed
after medicine and law but ahead of philosophy.
Historiology, always understood in its claim to possess the
character of modern science, is a constant avoidance of history.
Yet even in this avoidance, it still maintains a relation to history,
and that makes historiology and the historiologist bivalent.
If history is not explained historiologically and calculated in
terms of a particular image for the specific ends of supporting a
position and imparting a conviction, if history is instead placed
back into the uniqueness of its inexplicability, and if, through
this inexplicability, all historiological bustle and all the opinions
and beliefs that arise from it are placed into question and into
decision with respect to themselves, then what is being carried
out is what could be called historical thinking. The historical
thinker is just as essentially different from the historiologist as
from the philosopher, and least of all may the historical thinker
be brought together with that pseudoformation we are used to
calling "philosophy of history." Historical thinkers have the center
of their meditation and presentation in each case in some
specific domain (whether poetry, sculpture, or the founding and
guiding of a state) of the creativity, decisions, and peaks and valleys
within history. Insofar as the present era and the era to come
unfold historically (though in very different ways: the presentmodern
era does so inasmuch as it historiologically thrusts history
aside without being able to avoid it, whereas the era to come
does so inasmuch as it must turn in the direction of the simplicity
and acuity of historical being), the limits of the figures of the
historiologist and the historical thinker-seen from an external
perspective-are necessarily blurred today. This happens all the
more because historiology-in correspondence with the increasing
prominence of its character as newspaper science, a prominence
§76 [154-156] 121
due to all its presentations taking the form of news coveragespreads
the insidious illusion that it is a super-scientific consideration
of history, and thus it brings historical meditation completely
into confusion. This confusion is increased once again by
Christian historical apologetics, which has come into practice
and into power since Augustine's Civitas dei. Standing in service
to this apologetics today are already all non-Christians who are
concerned completely and only with saving the heretofore, i.e.,
with hindering essential decisions.
Genuine historical thinking will therefore be recognizable
only to a few, and of those few only the rare will save historical
knowledge out of the general mishmash of historiological opinion
and will turn that knowledge into the preparedness of a future
generation for decisions.
Still further removed than history is nature, and the closure
against the latter becomes all the more complete as the knowledge
of nature develops into an "organic" consideration without
realizing that the "organism" is merely the consummation of the
"mechanical." Therefore it happens that an era of unbridled
"technicism" can at the same time find its self-interpretation in
an "organic worldview."
19. With the ever-firmer entrenchment of the machinational-technological
essence of all the sciences, the differences between the
natural and the human sciences as regards objects and procedures
will subside more and more. The natural sciences will become
components of machine technology and of business. The human
sciences will expand into a comprehensive newspaper science
whose scope will be gigantic and in which the current "lived experience"
will always be interpreted historiologically and, as so
interpreted, will be published as quickly as possible and in the
form most easily comprehensible to everyone.
20. The "universities," as "sites of scientific research and teaching"
(as such, they are formations of the nineteenth century), are becoming
sheer business establishments. In these establishments,
which are ever "closer to reality," nothing is decided. They will
retain the last vestiges of a cultural decoration only as long as they
must also and for a while still remain a means for "cultural-political"
propaganda. Nothing resembling the essence of "universitas"
will be able to unfold out of them any longer: on the one
hand, because the commandeering of everything into politicalethnic
service makes such an unfolding otiose, and also because
science itself as a business can hold its course more securely and
easily without what is "proper to a university," i.e., without the
122 II. The Resonating [156-157]
will to meditation. Philosophy, understood here exclusively as
thoughtful meditation on truth, Le., on the question-worthiness
of beyng, and not as historiological and "system" -building erudition,
does not have a place in "universities" and certainly not in
the business establishments they will become. For nowhere at all
does philosophy "have" a place, unless it is the place it itself
founds, to which indeed no path could lead immediately, starting
from any established institution.
21. The foregoing characterization of "science" does not stem from
antagonism toward it, because such an attitude is altogether impossible.
"Science," with all its gigantic expansion today, its certainty
of success, and its placidity, does not possess what is required
to attain an essential status, on the basis of which it could
come into genuine opposition to the knowledge that derives
from thinking. Philosophy is neither for nor against science but
instead leaves it to its own craving to find profit in securing ever
more efficiently and quickly ever more useful results and thus in
anchoring ever more firmly the dependence of needs and wants
in the respective result and in its surpassing.
22. If it happens, as it must, that the pre-determined essence of modern
science is recognized, and so is its pure and necessarily serviceable
character as a business, along with the institutions this
requires, then in the horizon of that recognition gigantic future
advancements in the sciences are to be expected and indeed can
even be calculated. These advancements will raise the utilization
and exploitation of the earth, as well as the breeding and training
of human beings, into currently unimaginable states whose
coming cannot be prevented, or even delayed, by a romantic recollection
of earlier and other states. But it will also be increasingly
rare for these advancements to be taken as astonishing or
remarkable or even as cultural accomplishments; they will occur
instead in an unbroken series as, so to speak, trade secrets and
will then be consumed, with their results deployed in practical
applications. Only when the sciences have attained this businesslike
unremarkability in their development will they reach the
place toward which they themselves are driving: they will then
be concomitantly dissolved in the dissolution of all beings themselves.
With respect to this end, which promises to be a very lasting
final state, one that will always look like a beginning, science
today is still in its most advantageous starting point. Only the
blind and the foolish will say today that science is at its "end."
23. In this way, "science" pursues the securing of a state of knowledge
entirely free of need, and it thereby also always remains, in the era
[157--1581 123
of a complete lack of questioning, what is "most modern." All purposes
and gains are fixed, all means are at hand, all benefits can
be consummated; the only task is to overcome differences in the
degree of refinement and to procure for the results the greatest
possible scope of their easiest utilization. The hidden goal, to
which all this and other things are hastening without surmising-
or being able to surmise-the smallest part of it, is the state
of complete boredom (d. lecture course, 1929-309 ) in the domain
of the most proper achievements. These themselves will eventually
be unable to conceal the character of boredom any longer, in
case there still remains at that time a vestige of cognitive power in
order at least to be shocked by this state and to uncover it itself and
that which is gaping open there, namely, the abandonment of beings
by being.
24. Great unsettlement, however, comes only from essential knowledge,
knowledge that already stands in the other beginning, never from
powerlessness and sheer helplessness. But knowledge is steadfastness
in the question-worthiness of beyng, and beyng maintains
its unique dignity in such a way that it bestows itself seldom
enough in refusal as the hidden event of the passing by of
the decision regarding the advent or absconding of the gods in
beings. Who is to come who will ground this moment of passage
toward the beginning of another "era," i.e., toward the beginning
of another history of beyng?
The dissolution and joining together of the departments
that uphold science
The historiological human sciences are becoming newspaper science.
The natural sciences are becoming machine science.
"Newspaper" and "machine" are meant here in the essential sense
as the impelling modes of that final objectification which consummates
the modern era and which sucks all the substantiveness out of
beings, leaving them mere occasions for lived experience.
On account of this priority in the way of approach to organization
and arrangement, both groups of sciences come into agreement with
regard to the essential, i.e., with regard to their character as business
establishments.
This "development" of modern science, its coming into its essence,
is visible today only to a few and will be rejected by most as nonexistent.
It cannot be proven by matters of fact; instead, it can be
9. Die Grundbegriffe der Metaphysik: Welt-Endlichkeit-Einsamkeit, winter semester,
1929-30 (GA29-30).
124 II. The Resonating [158-160]
grasped only out of a knowledge of the history of being. Many "researchers"
will still think of themselves as belonging to the reliable
traditions of the nineteenth century. Just that many will still find in
relation to their objects new and richer content as well as satisfaction
and will perhaps incorporate this content into their overall theory.
Yet none of this disproves the procedure in which the entire institution
known as "science" is irrevocably caught up. Not only will science
never be able to extricate itself from that procedure, but it will
also, and above all, never want to do so. The more science progresses,
the less will it be able to want to extricate itself.
This procedure, however, is emphatically not something that appears
only in today's German university; rather, it touches everything
that at any place or time in the future might still desire to
speak as "science."
If thereby the previous, outgoing institutional forms still survive
for a long while, then one day they will only all the more decisively
make clear what has been occurring behind their seemingly protective
shield.
77. Experiri-experientia-experimentum"
experimentation" -£}!1t£lpia-experience-test
In order to provide sufficient determinateness to the concept of
scientific experimentation in the sense of the current, modern
science, we need to survey the levels and modes of "experience," for
"experimentation" belongs in that nexus. The long history of the
word (and that also means of the matter itself) which resonates in
the term "experimentation" must not mislead us into striving to find,
in the place where experimentum, experiri, and experientia occur,
knowledge also of today's "experimentation" or even of its immediately
preceding stages. The clearer the differences emerge that are
covered by the same word, the sharper will also be the grasp of the
essence of modern "experimentation," or at least the viewpoints will
be established from which alone that essence is visible. Instead of a
historiological pursuit of the history of the word, let us here base
ourselves on the matter itself and delineate a series of levels of "experience"
and of the "empiricaL" as a preparation for circumscribing
the essence of "experimentation."
1. "experiencing": striking up against something and indeed something
that strikes us; having to take in something that comes upon
us and does something to us, "affects" us, encounters us without
our complicity.
§77 [160-161] 125
2. experiencing as approaching something, something that does not
immediately "concern" us in the sense of 1; looking around and
looking over, exploring and specifically with the sole aim of discovering
how something looks and whether it actually is present
and can be found.
3. approaching something, as in 2, but in the mode of testing how it
looks and exists if this or that is added to it or subtracted.
In 2 and 3, what is experienced is always already something sought
in one way or another, and it is sought through the application of
specific aids. The mere looking around and looking at become an
observing, one that pursues what is encountered, and specifically
under changing conditions of its being encountered and presenting
itself.
Thereby the conditions and their changes can themselves be met
with again and be awaited. Yet they can also undergo alteration in
various ways through an intervention. In that case, we provide ourselves
with specific experiences through specific interventions and
through the introduction of specific conditions of more precise seeing
and determining.
Jeweler's loupe, microscope: making vision more acute and altering
the conditions of observability.
Thereby the instruments and tools are themselves manufactured
material things and are often of essentially the same kind as what is
to be observed.
One can speak here already of an experimentum, although no trace
of an "experiment" or of its conditions is given.
This is all the more so when the observations are gathered together,
whereby two cases are again possible: a haphazard piling up
of observations simply on the basis of their being unforeseeably
manifold and striking, and a gathering that aims at a certain order,
where the "principle" of the gathering is not at all taken from the
observed objects.
4. Experiencing, as an approaching that tests and observes, aims in
advance at the exposition of a regularity. Essential here is the anticipatory
grasp of what goes by rule, i.e., what constantly recurs
when the conditions are the same.
78. Experiri (£llIT£lpla) -"experiencing"
1. striking up against something, something that strikes us; something
comes upon us, touches us, and we must take it in; something
126 II. The Resonating [161-162J
befalls us. What strikes us, what concerns us; affection, sensation.
Receptivity and sensibility and the sense organs.
2. approaching something, looking around, looking over, exploring,
pacing off.
3. approaching as testing, asking one's own questions, whether when
this-then that if this-then that.
At levels 2 and 3, always already a more or less determined something that
is sought. At 2, what strikes me, what I encounter without my complicity,
is indeterminate. At 3, an intervention or some other sharpening
of the approach: dissecting, magnifying with specific aids, instruments,
tools, which are themselves material things. Loupe,
microscope, making vision more acute; conditions of observability.
Gathering all sorts of observations also about "regularities" in a quite
indeterminate order; things that are especially striking.
4. the fact that the instrumentally-aided approaching and testing
aim at the exposition of a rule. Anticipatory grasp of a regularity:
e.g., when so much of this-then so much of that follows. The
"when this-then that" as ever again something constant (ov).
Testing, running a test; Aristotle, Metaphysics A I: £!lrrnpia,
urroi\r)1{!l<; ["deeming"], the "when this-then each time that." Attempt,
not only "testing," but bringing the object "into temptation,"
setting a trap, making it that such and such is the casethat
such and such is not the case!
5. The approaching and testing, the aiming at a rule, in such a way
that altogether what is regular, and only this, determines in advance
the objective in its own domain. The domain not graspable
otherwise than through the exposition of rules (to test possibilities
of regularity, to tryout "nature" itself) and specifically such that
the rule is one of giving order to the measure and of possible measurability
(space, time). What is the fundamental significance of that
for tools as material and natural things?
Now for the first time the possibility, but also the necessity, of
modern experimentation. Why necessary? The "exact" experiment
(the one that measures); the inexact. Experimentation possible
only where an anticipatory grasp of an essential domain of
objects which is determined entirely by quantitative rules; and
the anticipatory grasp is what determines the experiment in its
essence.
Experiri-experientia-intuitus (argumentum ex re)
stands in opposition to componere scripta de aliqua re, i.e., the compiling of
previous opinions and citing of authorities, and the mere logical discussion
of these opinions in order to discover the most insightful opinion
§78 [162-164] 127
and especially the one that agrees with religious doctrine or in any
case does not contradict it (argumentum ex verbo). Cf. medieval natural
science, where the entire aim is essentia as the real.
Experiri-thus altogether opposed to what is authoritatively proclaimed
and to what in general cannot be shown and brought into the
light and so is inaccessible to the lumen naturale (opposed to the verbum
divinum, "revelation"). Cf. Descartes, Regula III.
This experiri already prior to the Middle Ages: £jllTnpiu, medical
doctors-Aristotle! When this-then that! £jllTElpiu, TEXVl'] already a
ulToAl']\ln<; of the "when this-then that" (the rule). But now, through
the opposition, an essential significance and especially if a transformation
of the human being: certainty of salvation and self-certainty.
Yet this only the general presupposition for the possibility of "experiments,"
which are thus not given as constituting a necessary and
prime component of knowledge. For that, a fundamentally new step is
required.
The specific and unique presupposition for experimentation is, as
remarkable as it may sound, that science become rational-mathematical,
i.e., in the highest sense, not experimental. Initial positing of
nature as such.
Because modern "science" (physics) is mathematical (not empirical),
it is necessarily experimental in the sense of the measuring experiment.
Sheer idiocy to say that experimental research is Nordic-Germanic
and that rational research, on the contrary, is of foreign extraction! We
would then have to resolve to number Newton and Leibniz among
the "Jews." It is precisely the projection of nature in the mathematical
sense that constitutes the presupposition for the necessity and possibility
of "experimentation" as measuring.
Now experimentation not only opposed to mere talk and dialectic
(sermones et scripta, argumentum ex verbo), but also opposed to arbitrary,
merely curiosity-motivated exploration of an indeterminately
represented domain (experiri).
Now experimentation a necessary component of exact science, a science
which is founded on the quantitative projection of nature and
which elaborates this very projection.
Now experimentation no longer opposed only to argumentum ex
verbo and "speculation," but also opposed to all mere experiri.
Therefore, a fundamental error and confusion of essential ideas to
say (d. Gerlach10 ) that because Roger Bacon, for example, discusses
10. E.g., Walter Gerlach, "Theorie und Experiment in der exakten Wissenschaft,"
in: M. Hartmann and W. Gerlach, Naturwissenschaftliche Erkenntnis und
ihre Methoden, Berlin, 1937.-Ed.
128 II. The Resonating [164-165]
experiri and experimentum and thereby also speaks of quantities, modern
science begins already in the Middle Ages.
If take that tack, then back to the source of this medieval "modernity":
Aristotle, £jlITnpta.
Now experimentation opposed to experiri.
In the postulation of nature as a nexus of the "existence" of things
according to laws, the notions of harmonia mundi and of ordo, K6ajlo<;
rorder, world"], playa co-determining role, though they become ever
more withdrawn.
Basic conditions of the possibility of modern experimentation:
1. the mathematical projection of nature; objectification; representedness.
2. transformation of the essence of actuality from essentiality to individuality.
Only under this presupposition can an individual result
claim the power to establish something and to verify it.
79. Exact science and experimentation
1. In what sense does exact science require experimentation?
2. Prior question: what is an experiment?
Experiri and experimentation
3. Show how, within natural science, "experiments" are different in their
character according to the respective objectivity and according to
their mode of interrogating. The purely measuring experiment.
4. A "psychological" experiment.
5. A "biological" experiment.
A "psychological" experiment
Discussed not in order to show what an experiment is (also this) but
to show another direction and level of objectification.
Now to look at what? Facts
Not at what? and
What distinction? laws
For what and why this "experiment"?
In what nexus of questioning does it stand?
80. Experiri-experientia-experimentum-"experimentation"
Experiencing, striking up against something, something strikes me, I have
undergone experiences, "bad" ones.
§80 [165-166] 129
In the Middle Ages, and even earlier, already differentiated with
respect to 'AOyoc:,: opposed to sermo (componere scripta de aliqua re), opposed
to the merely said, the communicated but not actually shown,
opposed to what is authoritatively proclaimed and as such is not at all
demonstrable. Instead, the in-specting and approaching toward something
so as to figure it out. Thereby always something sought and, according
to what is sought, a testing.
With the aid of something prepared, a device, instrumentum; or without
such an aid: e.g., testing whether the water is warm or cold, determining
the direction of the wind.
A proper procedure, in order to bring something to givenness. The
question, however, is "what" and "how": whether at issue is simply
such and such a thing, a quale, or instead the existence of a relation,
such as if-then, "cause-effect," the whence, the why. (Use of the loupe,
the microscope.) And again, whether this relation can be determined
quantitatively: if so much of this-then so much of that.
Anticipatory grasp of what is sought, i.e., of the interrogated as such.
The procedure is organized and set up accordingly. But all this experiri is
still not modern "experimentation."
What is decisive about modern "experimentation," testing as attempting,
is not the "apparatus" as such but, instead, the way of posing
questions, i.e., the concept of nature. "Experimentation" in the modern
sense is experientia in the sense of exact science. Because exact, therefore
experimentation.
Now it is no longer an opposition to mere talk and to the mere adducing
of opinions, "authorities," about some state of affairs; instead, now what is
opposed is the simple description, appropriation, and establishing of what offers
itself, without a specific anticipatory grasp to guide the procedure.
Even a description is already an "interpretation," something as "color,"
as "sound," as "magnitude." But there are different sorts of interpretation.
Physicalistic interpretation!
What is "more sure": the immediate, naive description or the exact
experiment? The former, because there theory is presupposed "less"l
What does the demand for the repeatability of an experiment
signify?
1. Constancy of circumstances and of instruments
2. Communication of the appertaining theory and mode of questioning
3. Universally valid demonstrability (universal validity and "objectivity");
representedness and correctness and truth-factuality.

III. THE INTERPLAyl
1. Cf., in this regard, (jbungen, summer semester 1937, Nietzsches metaphysische
Grundstellung: Sein und Schein, and (jbungen, winter semester 1937-38, Die metaphysischen
Grundstellungen des abendliindischen Denkens (Metaphysik), as well as all
the historical lecture courses.

81. Interplay
The confrontation with the necessity of the other beginning, out of
the originary posing of the first beginning.
The guiding disposition: pleasure in the interrogative and reciprocal
surpassing of the beginnings.
In this regard, everything concerning the distinction between the
guiding question and the basic question; answer to the guiding question
and proper unfolding of that question; transition to the basic
question (Being and Time).
All the lecture courses on the "history" of philosophy. The decision
with regard to all "ontology."
82. Interplay
is of a historical essence and builds the first bridge of the transitiona
bridge which, however, thrusts out toward a shore that must first
be decided.
Yet the interplay with the history of the thinking of the first beginning
is not historiological, additional, or pregiven material for a "new"
"system." Instead, it is itself the essential, transformative preparation
of the other beginning. Therefore we must direct our historical meditation,
perhaps still more inconspicuously and decisively, only to the
thinkers belonging to the history of the first beginning so that through
the interrogative dialogue with their way of questioning we might unexpectedly
plant a questioning that will some day find itself explicitly
rooted in another beginning. But this historical meditation, as the interplay
of the beginnings which are grounded in themselves and
which pertain-in each case differently-to the abyss, already arises
in a transitional way out of the other beginning (to grasp this already
requires the leap), and therefore such meditation is all too readily subject
to the misinterpretation that finds there merely historiological considerations
regarding works of thought chosen by arbitrary predilection.
This is all the more so since the external form of these historical
134 III. The Interplay [170-171]
meditations (lectures on the "historiology of philosophy") is in no way
different from what subsequent scholarship would still present as a
finished history of philosophy.
Historical meditations can be taken, even usefully, simply as historiological
and rectifiable considerations and perhaps even as discoveries,
without any intimation of history breaking through in
them, i.e., of the history which is the one of beyng itself and which
bears the decisions of all decisions.
It is on the ground of the thinking of beyng in its historicality that historical
meditations can be carried out. But what if the essence of thinking
has been lost to us and "logic" has been predestined to commandeer
"thinking," even though "logic" itself is indeed merely a vestige of the
powerlessness of thinking, i.e., of unsupported and unprotected questioning
in the abyss of the truth of being? And what if "thinking" retains
validity only as the faultless drawing of conclusions within the correct
representation of objects, i.e., as the avoidance of that questioning?
83. Being, according to all metaphysics
According to metaphysics, being can be found in beings, specifically
in such a way that thinking goes beyond beings.
The more exclusively thinking turns toward beings and seeks for
itself a foundation that is most eminently (d. Descartes and the modern
era), all the more decisively does philosophy withdraw from the
truth of beyng.
Yet how could the metaphysical renouncement of beings be
possible-or how would it be possible to renounce metaphysicswithout
falling prey to "nothingness"?
Da-sein is the grounding of the truth of beyng.
The less that humans are beings, the less that they adhere obstinately
to the beings they find themselves to be, all the nearer do they
come to being [Sein]. (Not a Buddhism! Just the opposite.)
84. Beings
in their emergence to themselves (ancient Greece); caused by a highest
instance of their essence (Middle Ages); things present at hand as
objects (modern era).
The truth of beyng is veiled more and more, and increasingly remote
is the possibility that this truth as such could become the grounding
power or could even be known at all.
[171-172]
85. The originary appropriation of the first beginning means
gaining a foothold in the other beginning
135
The originary appropriation of the first beginning (i.e., the appropriation
of its history) means gaining a foothold in the other beginning.
This is carried out in the transition from the guiding question
(What are beings?, the question of beingness, being) to the basic question:
What is the truth of beyng? (Being and beyng: the same and yet
fundamentally different.)
This transition, grasped historically, is the overcoming-and indeed
the first and the only possible overcoming-of all "metaphysics." Only
now can "metaphysics" be known in its essence, and in transitional
thinking all talk of "metaphysics" becomes equivocal. The question,
what is metaphysics?, situated in the domain of the transition to the
other beginning (d. the lecture connected to Being and Time and to
"On the Essence of Ground"), inquires into the essence of "metaphysics"
already in the direction of a first acquisition of a vanguard position
toward the transition into the other beginning. In other words, it already
inquires out of the other beginning. What it makes visible in its
determination of "metaphysics" is already no longer metaphysics but,
rather, is the overcoming of metaphysics. The aim of this question is
not the clarification-which means the perpetuation-of the previous
and, moreover, necessarily confused representation of "metaphysics"
but is instead the impetus into the transition and thereby into the
knowledge that every sort of metaphysics is at an end and must be so if
philosophy is to attain its other beginning.
If "metaphysics" is made visible as an occurrence belonging to Dasein
as such, that does not amount to a quite facile "anthropological"
anchoring of the discipline of metaphysics in the human being;
rather, with Da-sein that ground is acquired in which the truth of
beyng is grounded. As a result, beyng itself now originally gains its
sovereignty, and the position of surpassing beings-i.e., proceeding
from beings, specifically as things objectively present and as objects-
becomes impossible. And so it is first shown what metaphysics
was: precisely this surpassing of beings to beingness (Idea). Yet this
determination of "metaphysics" remains inevitably equivocal, inasmuch
as it looks like a mere updated version of the previous concept
and seems to leave untouched the matter itself. It does leave it so, but
since this grasp of the essence of "metaphysics" becomes primarily
and entirely a grounding of Da-sein, it denies "metaphysics" every
path to any further possibility. To grasp in transitional thinking
136 III. The Interplay [172-174]
means to dislodge what is grasped into its impossibility. Is it still necessary
to take this averting of "metaphysics" and guard it explicitly
from mingling with the "anti-metaphysical" intentions of "positivism"
(and its varieties)? Hardly, if we consider that "positivism" indeed
represents the crudest of all "metaphysical" modes of thought,
insofar as it on the one hand entails a very definite decision regarding
the beingness of beings (sensibility) and on the other hand always
surpasses precisely those beings through the fundamental
application of a homogeneous "causality." For transitional thinking,
however, what matters is not an "opposition" to "metaphysics," since
that would simply bring metaphysics back into play; rather, the task
is an overcoming of metaphysics out of its ground. Metaphysics is at
an end, not because it asked about the beingness of beings too much,
too uncritically, and too intensely but because, on account of the falling
away from the first beginning, its mode of questioning could
never interrogate that which was basically sought, viz., beyng, and
so ultimately, in the predicament of this powerlessness, it reverted to
a mere "renewal" of "ontology."
Metaphysics, as the knowledge of the "being" of beings, had to
come to an end (d. Nietzsche) because it never in the least ventured
to ask about the truth of beyng itself and therefore, even in its own
history, had to remain caught up in the confusion and uncertainty of
its guideline (thought). Precisely therefore, however, transitional
thinking must not succumb to the temptation to simply leave behind
what it grasped as the end and at the end; instead, this thinking must
put behind itself what it has grasped, i.e., now for the first time comprehend
it in its essence and allow it to be integrated in altered form
into the truth of beyng. Talk of the end of metaphysics must not mislead
us into thinking that philosophy would be done with "metaphysics."
Quite to the contrary, "metaphysics" in its essential impossibility
must now for the first time play over to philosophy, and the
latter itself in the same way must play over to its other beginning.
Thinking on this task of the other beginning (the question of the
"meaning" of beyng, in the terminology of Being and Time) shows that all
endeavors reacting against metaphysics (even as positivism, these endeavors
are always idealistic) are precisely re-active and thereby fundamentally
dependent on metaphysics. And so they themselves remain
metaphysics. All biologisms and naturalisms (which proffer "nature"
and the nonrational as the matrix from which everything arises, or as
the universal life in which everything simmers, or as the dark versus the
light, etc.) remain entirely rooted in the soil of metaphysics and need
metaphysics, even if only to rub up against in order to produce a spark
igniting the knowable, sayable, and-for these "thinkers" -writeable.
§87 [174-175] 137
Many signs-e.g., the incipient predominance of the "metaphysics"
of Richard Wagner and [Houston Stewart] Chamberlain-indicate
that the end of Western metaphysics, an end already carried out
creatively and uniquely by Nietzsche, is being covered over anew and
that this "resurrection" of metaphysics is once again making use of
the Christian churches for its own purposes.
86. What the history of metaphysics provides and thus passes on as
still implicit and as unknown to this history
L beingness is presence
2. beyng is self-concealment
3. beings have the priority
4. beingness is subsequent and for that very reason is the "apriori."
What is contained in all this cannot be grasped as long as the truth
of beyng has not become for us a matter of necessary questioning,
i.e., as long as we have not grounded the temporal-spatial playing
field in whose extensions it is first possible to fathom what has eventuated
in the history of metaphysics: the prelude of the appropriating
event itself as the prelude of the essential occurrence of beyng. Only
if the outlining of those extensions (1-4) of the history of metaphysics
succeeds will we grasp that history in its unraised ground. But as
long as we take our perspectives from what could become, and had
to become, the proper knowledge of metaphysics (theory of Ideas and
its variants), we are impelled into the historiological, except if we
already understand iota on the basis of articulations 1-4.
87. The history of the first beginning
(the history of metaphysics)
is the history of metaphysics. It is not the individual attempts at metaphysics,
the individual theories, that still tell us something now at the
end of all metaphysics; it is "only" the history of metaphysics that does
so. But this "only" is not a restriction; rather, it is the demand for something
more originary. (Still less may we misconstrue, with the aim of
transcending them, the individual forms of "metaphysics" as mere
games.) Instead, metaphysics must be taken now, at the end, in a serious
way which essentially surpasses every acceptance and transmission
of doctrinal fragments, every renewal of standpoints, and every
blending and equalizing of many standpoints.
138 Ill. The Interplay 76J
Metaphysics becomes visible in its history only if the questions
presiding in metaphysics are grasped and the way those questions
are treated in metaphysics is unfolded. To what extent does history
teach? What is meant thereby?
The occurrence of the question of beings as such, the occurrence
of the interrogation of beingness, is in itself a determinate opening
up of beings as beings, in such a way that the human being thereby
receives essential determination (homo animal rationale), a determination
which arises out of this opening up. Yet what does this opening
up of beings actually open with regard to beingness and thereby
with regard to beyng? A history, i.e., a beginning along with its derivations
and its advancements, is required to make possible (for those
who are beginning to question) the realization that refusal pertains
intrinsically to the essence of beyng. This knowledge, because it
thinks nihilism still more originarily, all the way down to the abandonment
by being, is the genuine overcoming of nihilism. The history
of the first beginning is in this way completely delivered from
the semblance of futility and sheer errancy; now for the first time a
great illumination comes over all previous works of thought.
88. The "historical" lecture courses belong in the sphere of this task
The "historical" lecture courses belong in the sphere of this task.
To make visible Leibniz's un fathom ably multifarious way of questioning
but to think Da-sein instead of the monas,
to follow Kant in carrying out his main steps but, through Da-sein, to
overcome the "transcendental" approach,
to work out Schelling's question of freedom but to ground the question
of "modalities" differently,
to bring Hegel's systematics within the predominant view but to think
it quite oppositionally,
and to venture an encounter with Nietzsche as the closest one but to
realize that he is the furthest one from the question of being.
These are a few ways, independent and yet interrelated, leading always
and only to knowledge of the one unique matter: that the essential
occurrence of beyng requires the grounding of the truth of beyng and
that this grounding must be carried out as Da-sein. Thereby all idealisms,
as well as the previous metaphysics and metaphysics in general,
are overcome as a necessary development of the first beginning. The
latter in this way falls again into darkness, to be grasped as such only
out of the other beginning.
[176-177] 139
89. The transition to the other beginning
To grasp Nietzsche as the end of Western metaphysics is not a historiological
finding that concerns what lies behind us; it is rather the
historical inception of the future of Western thought. The question of
beings must be brought to its proper ground, i.e., to the question of
the truth of beyng. And thinking (representing), which previously
constituted the guideline and the horizonal structure of every interpretation
of beings, is to be taken back into the grounding of the
truth of beyng, i.e., back into Da-sein. "Logic," as the theory of correct
thinking, then becomes meditation on the essence of language
as the naming that founds the truth of beyng. And as for beyng,
hitherto understood in the form of beingness as the most general
and most familiar, it now becomes as event the most unique and
most alienating.
The transition to the other beginning carries out a division, one that
does not in the least run between philosophical movements (idealismrealism,
etc.) or even between the stances of different "worldviews."
The transition divides the ascent of beyng and the grounding of the
truth of beyng in Da-sein from all occurrences and apprehendings of
beings.
What is divided is so decisively set apart that it is altogether impossible
for there to exist any common sphere of division.
This decisiveness of the transition involves no compromise and no
reconciliation but only long periods of solitude and the stillest raptures
at the fireside of beyng, although beyng still remains completely
thrust aside by the pale and artificial light of the "beings" (the
"reality that is close to life") of machination and lived experience.
The transition to the other beginning is decided, and yet we do not
know whither we are going, when the truth of beyng becomes true, and
whence history as the history of beyng takes its steepest and shortest
path.
As the transitional ones of this transition, we must pass through
an essential meditation on philosophy itself so that philosophy might
attain the beginning from which it can completely be itself again
without needing any support (d. Prospect, 15. Philosophy as "philosophy
of a people").
140 III. The Interplay [178-179]
90. From the first to the other beginning.
Negation
How few understand "negation," and how seldom is it firmly grasped
by those who do have some understanding of it! Negation is spontaneously
taken to be sheer rejection, dismissal, disparagement, and
even disintegration. Not only are these forms of negation the most
frequent and widespread, they also accommodate most immediately
the ordinary conception of the "no." Thus is excluded the thought of
the possibility that negation could be of an even deeper essence than
the "yes," especially since the yes is readily taken in the sense of any
kind of consent, as superficially as the no.
But are consent and rejection in the domain of representation and
representational "valuation" the only forms of the yes and the no? Is
it at all the case that that domain is the uniquely essential one? Or
does it not rather, like all correctness, descend from a more original
truth? And, ultimately, do not the yes and the no-indeed the latter
more originally than the former-constitute an essential possession
of being itself?
How is that possible, however, unless the essential form of the "no"
(and of the yes) resided in the Da-sein which is needed by beyng? The
no is the great leap away from, in which the "there" [Da-] in Da-sein is
leaped into. This leaping-away-from "affirms" that from which it leaps
but also possesses nothing negative as a leap. Of itself, the leapingaway-
from first takes on the leaping of the leap, and thus here the no
surpasses the yes. Accordingly, however, this no as seen from the outside
is the setting of the first beginning out in relief against the other
one but is never "negation" in the usual sense of rejection and disparagement.
Instead, this original negation is the same in kind as that
refusal which deprives itself of any accompanying and does so out of a
knowledge and recognition of the uniqueness of what, at its end, demands
the other beginning.
To be sure, such negation is not satisfied with leaping-away-from
in the sense of merely leaving behind. Rather, it develops by laying
bare the first beginning and its inceptual history and by placing back
into the possession of the beginning what has been laid bare, which,
as deposited there, both now and in the future stands out above everything
that ever arose in its wake and became an object of historiological
reckoning. This erecting of what stands out in the first beginning
is the meaning of the "destruction" occurring in the transition
to the other beginning.
§91 [179-180] 141
91. From the first to the other beginning2
The first beginning experiences and posits the truth of beings without
asking about truth as such, for the things unconcealed in the truth
of beings-namely, beings as beings-necessarily overpower everything
because they swallow up even nothingness, incorporating it
as the "not" and the "over and against." Or else they utterly annihilate
it.
The other beginning experiences the truth of beyng and asks about
the beyng of truth in order first to ground the essential occurrence of
beyng and to let beings arise as the true of that original truth.
In the primordiality of these beginnings, everything conventional
is always impossible, indeed in very different ways, and the transitional
is the genuine battle. Wherever the beginning gives rise to a
starting point and to an advancing, there is always the danger that
these will come to count as the measure by which the primordial is
not only gauged but also interpreted.
Proceeding from the first beginning, thought starts to entrench
itself in the form of the question, what are beings? (That is the guiding
question which is the starting point of Western "metaphysics.")
This question is posed at first tacitly and then explicitly. It would be
mistaken, however, to suppose that the guiding question could be
encountered in the first beginning and as the beginning. Only for
the sake of a rough, first instruction can the "guiding question" help
to characterize the first beginning in its way of thought.
On the other hand, as soon as the guiding question becomes the
measure for thinking, the primordiality of the beginning gets lost as
well: i.e., it draws back into what is ungrounded about the beginning.
If we actually seek the history of philosophy in the occurrence and
first beginning of thinking, and if we hold open this thinking in its
historicality by developing the guiding question, which has been undeveloped
throughout this entire history up to Nietzsche, then the
inner movement of this thinking can be seized, although only formally
by means of single steps and stages:
The experience, apprehension, and gathering of beings in their
truth are concretized in the question of the beingness of beings under
the guideline and anticipatory grasp provided by "thinking" (apprehensional
assertion).
2. Cf. The leap, 130. The "essence" ofbeyng and 132. Beyng and beings.
142 III. The Interplay [180-181]
Beingness and thinking
Though not further grounded, the priority and the anticipatory character
of thinking (Myoc:,-ratio-intellectus) are nevertheless concretized
in the view of the human being as animal rationale, a view that
originates in the initial experience of beings as such. Predelineated
thereby is the possibility that that character of thinking as guideline
with respect to the interpretation of beings might all the more elevate
itself into the unique place where beings are decided, especially
if in advance and for a long time ratio and intellectus have been compelled
into a position of service (Christian faith). From this indeed
there arose no new interpretation of beings but only a strengthening
of the importance of the human being as an individual (salvation of
the soul). Thus came the possibility of a situation in which ratio had
to judge as correct whatever was proper to faith, inasmuch as everything
revolved around faith, and faith exhausted all possibilities.
Why should not also ratio, at first in conjunction with fides, claim
the same for itself, become certain of itself, and make this certitude
the criterion for firmly establishing something and providing its
"reasons" (ratio as a reason)? Now commences a transfer of the crux
of thinking into the self-certitude of thinking (veritas becomes certitudo).
Therefore thinking must first be placed into a formula, and
what it claims to accomplish is now changed. Correspondingly, the
determination of the beingness of beings changes into objectivity:
Thinking (certainty) and objectivity (beingness)
To be shown:
1. how on this basis modern thought, up to Kant, is determined;
2. how on this basis the originality of Kantian thought arises;
3. how, through a return to Christian tradition together with an
abandonment of the Kantian position, the absolute thinking of
German Idealism emerges;
4. how the incapacity for metaphysical thought, in unity with the
operative forces of the nineteenth century (liberalism-industrialization-
technology), calls up positivism;
5. how, nevertheless, at the same time the tradition of Kant and of
German Idealism is preserved and a reappropriation of Platonic
thought is attempted (Lotze and his value-metaphysics);
6. how, going beyond all this and yet borne by it and tethered to it,
Nietzsche confronts the most problematic formation devised (out
of 3,4, and 5) by Schopenhauer and recognizes his own task to be
the overcoming of Platonism, even though he does not penetrate
into that domain of questioning and that basic position out of which
§91 [181-183] 143
alone a liberation from what was hitherto could have been secured
for such a task.
In this history, what becomes more and more self-evident and therefore
remains unthought is the attitude of the guiding question, an attitude
which possesses the sense of the formula: thinking and objectivity.
Even when Nietzsche brings forward becoming in opposition to
"being" (beingness), he does so while presupposing that "logic" determines
beingness. The flight into "becoming" ("life") is metaphysically
a mere expedient, the last expedient at the end of metaphysics, an
expedient that always bears signs of what Nietzsche himself recognized
very early as his task: the inversion of Platonism.
Yet every inversion is afortiori a return to and entanglement in the
opposite (sensible-supersensible), even though Nietzsche is very well
aware that this opposite, too, must lose its meaning.
For Nietzsche, "beings" (the actual) constitute becoming, and
"being" remains precisely the fixing and settling.
Nietzsche is caught up in metaphysics: from beings to being. He exhausts
all the possibilities of this basic position, which in the meanwhile,
as he himself saw for the first time and with great clarity, had
become in all its possible forms the common possession and "intellectual
chattel" of the worldviews of the masses.
The first step toward the creative overcoming of the end of metaphysics
had to be carried out in such a way that in one respect the
directionality of thinking is maintained, although in another respect
it is thereby at the same time radically raised beyond itself.
To maintain that directionality means: to inquire into the being of
beings. The overcoming means: to inquire first into the truth of beyng,
into what never did become, or even could become, a question in
metaphysics.
This double character of the transition-the attempt to grasp
"metaphysics" more originally in order thereby to overcome it at the
same time-is altogether distinctive of the "fundamental ontology"
of Being and Time.
That title came from clear knowledge of the task: no longer beings
and beingness, but being; no longer "thinking," but "time"; the priority
no longer given to thinking, but to beyng. "Time" as a name for the
"truth" of being; and all this as task, as "still on the way," not as "doctrine"
and dogma.
The basic position that presides over Western metaphysics (beingness
and thinking, with "thinking" -ratio-reason as the guideline
and anticipatory grasp for the interpretation of beingness) has now
come into question, but by no means such that thinking would
simply be replaced by "time," everything would merely be intended
144 III. The Interplay [183-184]
in a "more temporal" and more existemiell [existenzieller] way, and
otherwise would make no difference. Rather, precisely that which in
the first beginning could not come into question has now done so:
truth itself.
Now everything is different and is becoming different. Metaphysics
has become impossible, for the truth of beyng, the essential
occurrence of beyng, is first and is not merely the "whereto" a transcendence
is supposed to attain.
In play here, however, is not only the inversion of the previous
metaphysics; with the more original essential occurrence of the truth
of beyng as event, the relation to beings also changes (no longer that
of Urr08Eal<; ["what is laid down underneath"] and "condition of
possibility" -i.e., K01VOV and UrrOK£l}l£VOV ["what lies underneath"]).
Beyng essentially occurs as the event of the grounding of the "there"
and itself determines the truth of the essence out of the essential occurrence
of truth.
The other beginning transforms beyng by leaping into its more original
truth.
Western thought, in accord with its beginning, expresses in the
guiding question a precedence of beings over being. The "apriori" is
merely a veiling of the fact that beyng is taken as something subsequent,
and this veiling must dominate, insofar as beyng is opened up
within the immediately first accosting of beings by way of apprehending
and gathering (d. in The leap: being and the apriori).
Therefore it should not be surprising, but must be expressly
grasped as a consequence, how beings themselves within a definite
interpretation then become the paradigm for beingness. Despite, indeed
even on the basis of, the precedence of CPUO'l<; and the CPUO'H OV
["natural beings"], it is precisely the 8EO'£1 OV ["posited beings"] and
the rrolOU}l£VOV ["produced things"] that become what now supplies
the apprehensional interpretation with something understandable
and now determines (as UAl1-}lOPCP~ ["matter-form"]' d. the Frankfurt
lectures of 19363) the understandability of beingness itself (d.
The interplay, 97. <I>U<Jl<; (TEXVl1)).
Therefore what stands in the background and immediately with
Plato assumes special prominence is TEXVl1 as the basic character of
knowledge, i.e., the basic character of the fundamental relation to beings
as such.
Does not all this indicate that indeed even CPUO'l<; must be interpreted
in correspondence with the rrOlOU}l£VOV of rroll1O'l<; (d. ultimately
Aristotle) and that CPUO'l<; is not forceful enough to summon up
3. "Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes. n In Holzwege (GA5).
§91 [184-185] 145
itself its own truth, beyond rrapouoia and aA~eEla, and to bear the
development of this truth?
Yet that is what the other beginning seeks to accomplish and must
accomplish: the leap into the truth of beyng in such a way that beyng
itself grounds being human and indeed not directly and immediately
but instead only as a consequence of the dependence on Da-sein and
as this very dependence.
The first beginning is not mastered, the truth of beyng, despite its
essential lighting up, is not explicitly grounded. That means: a human
anticipatory grasp (of assertion, of T£XV l1 , of certainty) becomes the
guideline for the interpretation of the beingness of beyng.
What is needed now is the great inversion, one beyond all "revaluation
of values," an inversion in which beings are not grounded on the
human being, but humanness on beyng. That, however, requires a
higher power of creating and questioning and at the same time a
deeper readiness for suffering and enduring in the entirety of a complete
transformation of the relations to beings and to beyng.
The relation to beyng can now no longer remain within a corresponding
repetition of the relation to beings (OtaVO£tV-vO£tvKaTl1yoP£
tV ["predicating"]).
Because that inceptual anticipatory grasp in the comportment of
apprehending (vouc,-ratio) takes the human being out into beings, so
that on account of such anticipation a highest being is thought as apx~
["origin"]-aiTia ["cause"]-causa-the unconditioned, it then seems
as if this were not a drawing down of being into the human. That anticipatory
grasp provided by thought in the first beginning, as the
guideline for the interpretation of beings, can indeed be understood
from the other beginning as a kind of non-mastery of the still nonexperience
able Da-sein (d. The grounding, 212. Truth as certainty).
In the first beginning, truth (as unconcealedness) is a character of
beings as such, and according to the transformation of truth into the
correctness of assertion, "truth" comes to determine beings as transformed
into objects. (Truth as correctness of judgment, "objectivity,"
"actuality"-the "being" of beings)
In the other beginning, truth is recognized and grounded precisely
as the truth of beyng and beyng itself precisely as the beyng of truth,
Le., as the intrinsically turning event to which pertain the inner falling-
apart of the fissure and thus the abyss.
The leap into the other beginning is the return to the first, and
vice versa. Yet the return to the first beginning ("re-petition") is not
a transposition into something past, as if this could be made "actual"
again in the usual sense. The return to the first beginning is rather,
and precisely, removal from it, the occupying of that remote position
146 m. The Interplay [185-187]
which is necessary in order to experience what began in that beginning
and as that beginning. For without this remote position-and
only the position in the other beginning is a sufficient one-we would
always remain too near the beginning and would do so in an insidious
way, inasmuch as what followed the beginning is still roofing us
in and restraining us, such that our gaze remains trammeled in the
sphere of the traditional question, what are beings? In other words,
it remains confined within metaphysics of one sort or another.
Only remoteness from the first beginning allows us to experience
the fact that there the question of truth (aM9na) remained indeed
necessarily unasked and that its nonoccurrence determined in advance
that Western thought would be "metaphysics."
And this knowledge alone passes on to us the necessity of preparing
the other beginning and of experiencing in the development of
this preparedness the most proper plight in its full darity, i.e., the
abandonment by being, which is the deeply concealed counterpart to
the nonoccurrence of the question of truth and therefore cannot at
all be explained on the basis of current or past faults and omissions.
If this plight did not have the greatness of origination out of the
first beginning, from where would it then take its power of compelling
us to prepare for the other beginning? And that is why the question
of truth is the first step toward such preparedness. This question
of truth, only one essential form of the question of beyng, will in the
future keep the latter question out of the realms of "metaphysics."
92. The confrontation between the first and the other beginning
Not a counter-movement; for all counter-movements and counterforces
are essentially codetermined by that which they are counter
to, although in the form of an inversion. Therefore a counter-movement
never suffices for an essential transformation of history. Counter-
movements are caught up in their own conquest, which means
they are trammeled by what they conquer. They do not free up a
creative ground; instead, they deny it as unnecessary.
Beyond counter-forces, counter-drives, and counter-arrangements,
something utterly different must commence. With regard to the transforming
and saving of the history determined by the West, that means:
future decisions will not be made in previous domains ("culture""
worldview"), ones still upheld by counter-movements. Instead, the place
of decision must first be grounded, specifically through the opening up
of the truth of beyng in the uniqueness of beyng, a uniqueness which lies
anterior to all the opppositions in the previous "metaphysics."
§94 [187-188] 147
The other beginning is not a counter-trend to the first; rather, as
something utterly different, it stands outside of the "counter-" and outside
of all immediate comparison.
Therefore this confrontation is also not an opposition, neither in
the sense of crude rejection nor by way of a sublation of the first in
the other. The other beginning, on the basis of a genuine originality,
procures for the first beginning both the truth of its history and
thereby its inalienable, most proper otherness, which becomes fruitful
only in the historical dialogue of thinkers.
93. The great philosophies
are towering mountains, unconquered and unconquerable. Yet they
bestow on the land its highest, and they point into its rocky depths.
As they stand they focus the gaze, and in each case they form a
sphere of vision; they endure visibility and concealment. When are
such mountains that which they are? Certainly not when we have
supposedly conquered them by climbing their peaks, but only when
they truly stand there for us and for the land. Yet how few of us are
capable of letting the most alive heights rise up in the stillness of the
mountain range and of standing in the sphere of this over-towering.
The genuinely thoughtful confrontation must strive only for this
accomplishment.
The differentiating confrontation [Aus-einander-setzung] with the
great philosophies-as basic positions of metaphysics within the history
of the guiding question-must be constructed in such a way
that every philosophy, as something essential, comes to stand in the
manner of a mountain among mountains and thereby gives standing
to what in it is most essential.
To achieve that, the guiding question must in each case be newly
developed (out of the reticent basic question) according to its full structure
and in the direction of the respective impetus (d. Prospect, Inceptual
thinking).
94. The confrontation of the other beginning
with the first beginning can never mean showing up the previous history
of the guiding question-and thus "metaphysics"-as "erroneous."
For then we would have misconceived the essence of truth just as
much as the essential occurrence of beyng, both of which are inexhaustible
because they are what is most unique for all knowledge.
148 III. The Interplay [188-189]
What the confrontation does show, however, is that the previous
interpretation of beings has lost all necessity and can no longer experience
or compel a need for its "truth" or for the way it leaves unasked
even the truth about itself. For, since Plato, the truth of the
interpretation of "being" has never been questioned. Representational
correctness and its validation in intuition were merely carried
over from the representation of beings back to the representation of
the "essence"; last of all in pre-hermeneutical "phenomenology."
95. The first beginning
The concealment of the inceptual must be safeguarded above all. Every
distortion of it through attempts at explanation must be avoided, since
by necessity an explanation never attains the beginning but merely
drags it down to the explanatory level.
In the first beginning: "time" as presencing and also as constancy
(in a double, convoluted sense of "present") forms the open realm
out of which beings as beings (being) possess truth. In correspondence
with the greatness of the beginning, "time" -either as itself or
as the truth of being-is never deemed a worthy object of questioning
and experience. And just as little is it asked why time comes into
play, for the truth of being, as the present and not also as the past and
future. What thus remains unasked conceals itself as such and allows
inceptual thinking to recognize only the uncanniness of emergence,
the uncanniness of the constant presencing of beings in the open
(aA~eela), as that which constitutes essential occurrence. Essential
occurrence [Wesung] is understood as presencing [Anwesung] though
is not explicitly grasped as such.
That to us, out of the first beginning and in a retrieving meditation,
time appears primarily as the truth of beyng does not mean that the
original, full truth of beyng could be grounded only on time. Indeed
at first there must on the whole be an attempt to think the essence of
time so originarily (in the temporal "ecstases") that time becomes
graspable as possible truth for beyng as such. Yet this thinking of time
already brings it, through relatedness to the "there" of Da-sein, into
essential relation with the spatiality of Da-sein and thereby with space
(ct. The grounding). Compared to their usual representations, however,
time and space are in this case more originary and are entirely
time-space, which is not an interconnection but something more originary
in the belonging together of time and space. This something
points to the essence of truth as the dearing-concealing. The truth of
beyng is nothing less than the essence aftruth, grasped and grounded as
§97 [189-190] 149
the clearing-concealing; it is the occurrence of Da-sein, the occurrence
of the axis in the turning as self-opening center.
96. The inceptual interpretation of beings as ",uat(;
The meagerness of our capacity for genuine thought is evident in the
fact that we no longer appreciate the uniqueness of this projection of
beings as ",vale;. Instead, we pass it off as something most obvious, since
what immediately confronts human thinking is of course "nature."
To say nothing of the fact that at issue here is not at all "nature"
(neither as object of natural science, nor as landscape, nor as sensibility),
how are we to grasp correctly what is alien and unique in this
projection?
In the open realm of ",vale;, why did A6yoe; as well as voue; have to
be named very early as foundational sites of "being," and why did all
knowledge have to be instituted according to them?
The oldest transmitted saying about beings: the aphorism of Anaximander
(d. s. s. 324 ).
97. <l>uale; (T£XVf\)
So overpowering is ",vale; that vo£iv and A6yoe; are experienced as
belonging intrinsically to it and even to beings in their beingness
(which is not yet grasped as the "general," in the manner of an Idea).
Yet no sooner does experience, as original knowledge of beings
themselves, develop into a questioning of them than the questioning
itself, by withdrawing from beings, must distinguish itself from them
and be grasped in a certain sense as autonomous and even, by placing
itself before beings, as pro-ducing them. At the same time, however,
as a questioning it must seize upon a certain viewpoint, one
which can be taken only from what is interrogated itself. Yet how is
that possible if beings as such are the first and the last? And what if
constancy and presencing (as emergence, aA~e£l(X) are experienced
and established as self-emergence, over and against questioning and
independent of questioning, and thus not (as is questioning) an accosting
of beings and thereby not a proficiency in them, in their beingness,
i.e., not a (the) r£xvf\? Since ",vale; is not TEXVf\ but indeed
what first allows TEXVf\ to be experienced and seen as such, therefore
4. Lecture course, Der Anfang der abendliindischen Philosophie (Anaximander und
Parmenides), summer semester 1932 (GA35).
150 III. The Interplay [190-192]
the more questioning the question becomes (Le., the more it brings
itself before beings as beings and thus interrogates beingness and entrenches
itself in the formula rl 'to oV;), the more rEXVl1 must then
precisely come to count as what determines the viewpoint. CPUO'l<; is
not 'texvl'], which now means that what pertains to 'texvl'], namely,
the skilled gaze in advance at the doo<; ["look"], the representing and
bringing before oneself of the look-precisely all this occurs of its own
accord in CPUO'l<;, in Bv nov. ouO'ta: is the eioo<;, tOea:, as emergent (cpUO'l<;),
as stepping forth (aA~e€la:), yet as offering a view of itself.
That Plato can interpret the beingness of beings as tOea: implies not
only an experience of OV as CPUO'l<; but also the development of the question
under the guideline of 'teXVl1 such that 'texvl'] is the counter-attitude
to CPUO'l<; and at the same time is compelled by cpUO'l<;. 'texvl'] then indeed,
and especially in Aristotle, offers the anticipatory grasp for the interpretation
of beingness as the O'uvoAov ["junction"] of !lOPCP~ and vAl']. Thereby
is posited that distinction (forma-materia, form-content) which, incipiently
and in the sense of the dominant, guiding question, prevails in
all metaphysical thinking. It does so most strongly and surely but at the
same time most inflexibly, in Hegel (d. Frankfurt lectures of 1936, "On
the origin of the work of art" ["Vom Ursprung des Kunstwerkes'T).
98. The projection of beingness upon constant presencei'
What is is what shows itself as such, in constancy and presence. By
making explicit this domain upon which beingness is hiddenly projected,
we see that beingness makes reference to time. How "time" is
to be understood here is initially unclear, however, and just as unclear
is the role played by time properly understood.
The answer to both these questions runs: time is experienced here
in a concealed way as temporaIizing, as transporting, and thus as an
opening up; it is as such that time essentially occurs in the essence of
truth for beingness.
Time as transporting and opening up is in itself thereby equally a
granting of place; it creates "space." Space and time are not of the same
essence, but each belongs intrinsically to the other.
Space also must be understood here in the originary sense, as the
clearing of a place for something (this can be indicated in the spatiality
of Da-sein but not grasped there in its full originality).
5. "Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes." In Holzwege (GA5).
6. Cf. The leap, 150. The origin of the distinction between what a being is and the fact
that it is.
§99 [192-193] 151
Constancy and presence in their unity must therefore be determined
temporally-spatially (with each side taken in a double sense),
if they are to be grasped with respect to the truth of being.
Constancy is the enduring of the transporting into the having-been
and into the to-come, and "duration" as mere continuance is only a
consequence of this endurance.
Presence is the present in the sense of the gatheredness of the enduring
in accord with the withdrawal of the latter out of the transportings,
which are therefore disguised and so forgotten. In this way
the semblant time-Iessness of genuine "beings" arises.
Grasped spatially, constancy is the filling and fulfilling of space
(space that is not explicitly experienced) and thus is a granting of place.
Presence is a granting of a place in the sense of giving space for beings
which are put back into presence and thus are constant.
The unity of temporalizing and the granting of place, and indeed
in the mode of presencing, constitutes the essence of beingness: the
overcrossing.
Whence the curious fact that beings of such being (eternity) can
pretend to be spaceless and timeless and even superior to space and
time?
The reason is that space and time remain concealed in their essence,
and to the extent that they are determined, they are so by way
of that path which leads to them insofar as they themselves are taken
as some sort of beings and thus as "definite present things."
In this way, however, space and time are referred to what is most
palpably present, the crWJlC( ["body"], what has the character of a material
body, and to the modes of changeover, Jl£t'c(~OA~, which occur
in this domain. Space and time follow, or precede, such change.
As long as the dominance of the inceptual interpretation of being
remains unbroken, there will remain in force this thrusting aside of
space and time in the realm in which they are most readily encountered.
An inquiry such as the one indicated by the title Being and Time
will by necessity not be understood, since it calls for a radical transformation
of questioning.
99. "Being" and "becoming" in inceptual thinking7
"Becoming" as coming forth, and "passing away" as disappearing: these
only in the Greek manner and intrinsically related to <pUcrl~.
7. Cf. Die Auslegungen der Aristotelischen "Physik" (Marburg Ubungen); cf lecture
course, Einfilhrung in die Metaphysik, summer semester, 1935 (GA40).
152 III. The Interplay [193-194]
Then, in general, becoming as change of presencing, changeover,
1l£ra:~OA~, the broadest concept of Kiv'lcrt<;, "motion."
Motion as the presencing of the changeable as such
Aristotle is the first to conceptualize the essence of motion in the
specifically Greek way in terms of constancy and presence (i.e., in
terms of oucria), and to do so he must explicitly bring into the account
the KtvOUIl£VOV ["moving thing"] as such.
For this, however, already presupposed is the interpretation of beings
as £ioo<;-iOEa and thus as 1l0PCP~-UA'l; i.e., presupposed is rEXV'l,
which is essentially related to cpucrt<;.
Thus results motion as completedness, as the essence of presencing,
keeping itself in the domain of manufacturing and finishing.
Motion must not be understood here in the modern sense as locomotion
in time; even the Greek cpopa ["motion with respect to place"]
is not that.
For, in this modern determination, motion is viewed in terms of the
moving thing, and the latter is understood as a spatia-temporal, punctual
mass. The task, however, is to grasp motion as such as a mode of
being (oucria). The essential difference between the metaphysical and
physical understanding of motion can be seen most clearly in terms of
the concept and essence of rest.
Physically, rest is standstill, stoppage, absence of motion; thought
and calculated quantitatively: rest is a limit case of motion, its limit
in the vector of decrease.
Metaphysically, however, rest is in the genuine sense the highest
concentration of movedness, concentration as the simultaneity of possibilities
in fulfilled and most constant readiness.
An ens "actu" is precisely a being at "rest," not in "action" but, rather,
concentrated into itself and in that sense fully present.
Because we customarily take beings in terms of this "actual" actuated
acting [von diesem "wirklichen" gewirkten Wirkenden], we constantly
overlook the basic characteristic of rest in the essence of "beings" as "actualities."
E.g., we take a thing as an object, but who has considered that
this thing is precisely resting and that such is even a preeminent rest?
On account of this overlooking of the "metaphysical" rest in beings
as such, it happened that beingness was altogether misapprehended
and that one took "substance" as satisfactory, and that people
later found themselves dissatisfied with this concept as something
that was not grasped and were compelled to undertake an even more
unsatisfactory "overcoming" of it.
In this regard, what does the inceptual emphasis on OV as "unmoved"
versus "change" signify? And from this point of view, what does Plato's
§lOO [194-196] 153
interpretation of the KLVOUjl£VOv as ~~ ov signify, despite the fact that
Kivl1(jl~ belongs among the highest yevll of OV, according to the
Sophist?
What is accomplished by the clarification of motion in terms of
6UvaJ.H~ ["possibility"] and £vepY£la ["actuality"]? And where does its
later, non-Greek misinterpretation lead?
100. The first beginningS
In the first beginning, beings are experienced as <pU(jl~ and are so
named. Beingness as constant presence is still veiled therein: <pu(n~ as
prevailing emergence.
The fact that beingness was grasped as constant presence from ancient
times counts already for most people as a ground already, if they
ever do ask about grounds. But the early and inceptual character of
this interpretation of beings does not immediately constitute a
ground; quite to the contrary, it makes the interpretation all the
more problematic. An appropriate inquiry will show that the truth of
beingness is not asked about at all. For the thinking distinctive of the
first beginning, the interpretation is ungrounded and cannot be
grounded, and rightly so, if to explain by leading back to another
being (!) is understood as constituting a grounding.
Nevertheless, this interpretation of OV as <p6(jl~ (and later as iOfa) is
not entirely ground-less, though its ground (Le., its truth) is indeed
hidden. It could be argued that the experience of impermanence, of
coming to be and passing away, had suggested and called up as a
counter-measure the positing of constancy and presence. Yet how is
it that things which come to be and pass away count as nonbeings?
Indeed that happens only if beingness is already determined as constancy
and presence. Therefore beingness is not read off from beings
or from nonbeings; rather, beings are projected upon this beingness
in order to first show themselves in the open realm of this projection
as beings or nonbeings.
Whence and why is the opening of beingness always a projection?
Whence and why is this projection a projection of beings upon time
(itself not understood)? Are both of these interdependent? (Ecstatic
time and projection grounded as Dasein).
That the truth of beyng remains concealed, although beingness is
placed in it ("time"), must be grounded in the essence of the first
8. Cf. The interplay, 110. The iliEu, Platonism, and idealism; d. the debilitation of
qJ6(jt~.
154 III. The Interplay [196-197]
beginning. Does not this concealment of the ground of the truth of
being also mean that the history of Greek Dasein, a Dasein determined
by this truth, was placed on the shortest path and that the
present was completed in a great and unique creative moment?
Does it not also mean, on the other hand, that what follows the
first beginning is delayed and has to withstand a self-refusal of being
all the way up to the abandonment by being?
The transition to the other beginning needs to prepare a knowledge
of this historical destiny. The confrontation with the first beginning
and with its history also belongs here. Platonism dominates this history
and determines a certain manner of dealing with the guiding
question, a manner that can be indicated by the title: being and thinking
(d. lecture course, s. s. 359).
But to understand this title correctly, it must be noted:
1. The word being in this title refers to beingness and not, as in Being
and Time, to being itself originarily interrogated in its truth; beingness
as what holds "in general" for beings.
2. Thinking is meant in the sense of the representing of something in
generaL and this representing is understood as presentlfying and thus
anticipating the sphere in which beings are grasped with respect to constant
presence, though without the temporal character of this interpretation
ever corning to be recognized. Indeed it is recognized so little that
even after the unprecedented interpretation of ouola as constant presence
in Being and Time and the grasping of presence in its temporal character,
people still speak of the timelessness of "presence" and "eternity."
They do so because they adhere to the common concept of time, a concept
that is taken merely as the frame for the changeable and thereby is
unable to find fault with what is constantly present!
Thinking, as vO£lv, A6yoc:" iO£lv ["seeing"], here means reasoning:
the comportment by which and in whose sphere beingness is determined,
even if in a quite ungrounded manner. To be distinguished
from this is "thinking" in the broader and still to be determined
sense of philosophizing (d. inceptual thinking). In this regard, every
apprehension and determination (concept) of beingness and of beyng
is a matter of thinking. Yet the decisive question remains: in what
domain of truth does the uncovering of the essence of being take
place? Basically, even where, as in the history of the guiding question,
beingness is grasped on the basis of vO£lv, the truth of this thinking
is not what is thought as such but is time-space as the essential
occurrence of truth wherein all representing must abide.
9. Lecture course, Einfiihrung in die Metaphysik, summer semester, 1935
(GA40).
§102 [197-198] 155
At the beginning, a being was always determined also as a €V, so
that for Aristotle €V and ov, a being and a one, are convertible. Unity
constitutes beingness. And unity means here: unification, original
concentration into the self-sameness of what is constant and integrally
present. The preeminent determination of the thinking of beingness
(unity) is then, appropriately, the unity of the "I"-think, the
unity of transcendental apperception, the self-sameness of the I; Leibniz
joins both of these in a deeper and richer sense in the monad.
101. From early on, the great simplicity . ..
From early on, the great simplicity of the first beginning of the thinking
of the truth of beyng must stand clearly in a sure light (what does
it mean and what does it ground that eival ["being"] is placed as
cpUCHe; into the aMeEla of A6yoe; and vOElv).
The illumination of this beginning must have previously renounced
bringing into playas an interpretative resource all that
arose only from the inability to master the beginning and from the
collapse of aA~eEla: vOElv as voue; of the iOElv of an iO£a, KOlVOV and
A6yoe; as anocpavCHe; ["assertion"] of the KaTT)yopial ["categories"].
In the confrontation with the first beginning, however, the inheritance
first becomes an inheritance and the future ones first become
inheritors (which they never become merely through the accident of
being later ones).
102. Thinking: The guideline of the guiding question of
Western philosophy
Inceptually, thinking is the anticipatory ap-prehension and gathering
of the unconcealedness of what emerges and is constantly present as
such.
Because aA~eEla nevertheless remains ungrounded and therefore
sinks down into correctness, so also thinking, as a faculty, falls prey to
a "psychological"-Le., ontic-interpretation. The sinking down into
correctness signifies especially, however, when seen with respect to
the beginning, that for correctness itself its own playing field remains
ungrounded and constantly disturbed without being recognized for
what it is. The relation already prepared by Plato between \jJUX~ and
aA~eEla (ov) as ~uyov ["yoke"] has become since Descartes the eversharper
subject-object relation. Thinking becomes the I-think; the 1-
think becomes: I unify originally, I think unity (apriori).
156 III. The Interplay [198-200]
Thinking is anticipatory granting of presence as such.
Yet this relation is only the path on which thinking, by grasping
in advance and unifying, posits the unity of what is encountered and
so allows this to be encountered as a being. Beings become objects.
At first, all efforts then implicitly strive to make this relation itself
(thinking as the thinking of the I-think-something) purely and simply
the ground of the beingness of beings and indeed through assumption
of the inceptual determination of beings as what is ev.
In this manner, identity becomes the essential determination of
beings as such. Identity derives from the aA~eeta of </,OOt<;, from presence
as unconcealed gatheredness into unconcealedness.
In the modern era, identity attains its preeminence in the I; this I
is at once grasped as the preeminent identity, i.e., the identity which
is explicitly self-appertaining and which, by knowing itself, is precisely
in this knowledge.
From here we can begin to see why knowledge itself becomes the
ground of beingness and thus becomes the most proper being and
why for Hegel absolute knowledge is the absolute reality.
This history brings to expression in the most acute and unconditional
way the dominance of thinking as the guideline for the determination
of beingness.
Owing to the already dominant guideline, knowledge as selfknowledge
is the highest identity, the most proper being, and as such
dwells at the same time in the possibility of conditioning, in its own
way as knowledge, all other objectivities and indeed not only in a
comparatively transcendental sense but-as in Schelling-in such
fashion that what is other to the I is itself determined as visible
spirit. Thereby now once again, and ultimately, identity is raised
into the absoluteness of indifference, which of course does not mean
sheer emptiness.
An equally essential witness to this absolute position of thinking
as guideline is the view of philosophy as "theory of science" ["Wissenschaftslehre"]
or "system of science." The concept of "science" here at
issue must be kept quite distinct from the later one derived from it
through a process of decline, namely, the concept of "positive science"
in the nineteenth century.
To say philosophy is a "science" (instead of being a "worldview" or
an "art of living" or "wisdom") does not mean it is supposed to match
up with other sorts of extant "sciences." Rather, it means that thinking,
in its highest form, is the unconditioned guideline for the interpretation
of beings as such, i.e., for the unique task of philosophy.
That is why for Fichte "theory of science" = metaphysics, and likewise
for Hegel metaphysics = "science of logic."
§ 102 [200-201] 157
In this way, the pure relation of the l-think-unity (basically a tautology)
becomes the unconditioned relation, which means that the selfpresent
present becomes the paradigm of all beingness.
However much everything in the deeper relations remains hidden,
the one decisive circumstance thereby shows itself: because
thinking becomes without condition the guideline, and the more
genuinely it does so, all the more decisively is presentness as suchLe.,
"time" -in an original sense that which in an entirely hidden
and unquestioned way gives truth to beingness.
Absolute knowledge, unconditioned thinking, is now the utterly
paradigmatic being and likewise the one that grounds everything.
Only now can we see that the guideline is not a mere procedural
aid in the act of thinking; it is rather the foundational and as such
hidden provision of the horizon for the interpretation of beingness.
Since it arises from ungrounded aA~e£la, this provision of the horizon
can develop in the beginning only by forming out of itself the
basic component (the subject-object relation) of correctness along
with its own possibilities (of self-knowledge-reflexion) up to the
level of the unconditioned in identity as such.
Thus it becomes clear at the same time how, in absolute knowledge,
"correctness" is maximally increased, so that as the present of
the present it must return to aA~e£la in a certain way and on another
level-in such a way, of course, that every explicit relation to correctness
now still more definitively comes to be known and even
questioned.
How little this can succeed is manifest in Nietzsche'S understanding
of truth. For him, truth deteriorates into a necessary illusion,
into an unavoidable stabilization introduced into beings themselves,
which are determined as "will to power."
Thus Western metaphysics at its end is furthest from the question
of the truth of beyng and yet is at once closest-in the sense that as it
ends it has prepared the transition to this question.
Truth as correctness is unable to recognize (Le., to ground) its
own playing field as such. It helps itself by raising itself up to the
unconditioned and by bringing everything under itself, so as to become
(it seems) free from the need for a ground.
In order to expose the history of the "guideline," Le., the establishment
of the horizon in absolute knowledge, the following steps
and levels are important:
From the ego cogito sum as the first certainty (the definitive certum
= verum = ens) to the connaissance des verites necessaires ["knowledge of
necessary truths"] as condition of possibility for rejlexion, Le., for
grasping the I as "1." The most necessary truth is the essence of what
158 III. The Interplay [201-202]
is true as identitas, and identitas is the entitas entis. Insofar as this is
known in advance (qua principium), it provides the horizon for grasping
the perceptio and its perceptum, for apperceptio, i.e., for explicitly
grasping the monas as monas.
From here the way is cleared to the original-synthetic unity of
transcendental apperception.
Thence to the "1" as the original identity that knowingly pertains
to itself and is therefore in "being." (A = A grounded in the I = I, and
not I = I as a mere particularization of the A = A.)
Yet insofar as the "I" is grasped transcendentally as I-think-unity,
this original identity is at the same time the unconditioned identity,
conditioning everything but nevertheless not yet absolute identity,
because for Fichte what is posited is so only as not-I. The way to absolute
identity first in Schelling's philosophy.
103. On the concept of German Idealism
1. Idealism:
a) determined through the interpretation of QV as ibEa, seen-ness,
represented-ness; and indeed what is represented is the KOIVOV
and the ad ["eternal"]. Among other issues, anticipation of the
interpretation of beings as ob-jects for representing.
b) representing as ego percipio, representedness as such for the I think,
which is itself an I think of myself I have a self-representation of
myself and so am certain of myself.
Origin of the priority of the ego lies in the will to certainty,
self-certainty, self-reliance.
c) In this way, the "I"-represent as self-representing still remains
in the currentness of each current I. What is thus represented as
ground of the representing of the ibEa does not yet correspond
in this way to the ibEa, is not yet the KOIVOV and ad. Therefore,
self-representing must become self-knowing in the absolute
sense, that knowledge which knows in a unified way the necessity
of the relation that proceeds from the object to the I and
from the I to the object.
The self-knowledge of this necessity is freed from one-sidedness
and so is absolute. This absolute knowledge originates in the
"I represent the representation and what is represented in it"
and, as absolute, is equated with the divine knowledge possessed
by the Christian God. Such equating is facilitated by the fact that
what this God represents in representing are the "Ideas"; d.
§l04 [202-204] 159
Augustine at a time when "idealism" had not yet developed.
Idealism only since Descartes.
2. German Idealism, pre delineated in Leibniz and based on Kant's
transcendental step beyond Descartes, is the idealism that attempts
an absolute thinking of the ego cog ito of transcendental apperception.
At the same time, such idealism grasps the absolute
within a directedness toward Christian dogma, in such a way that
the latter attains in this philosophy its proper truth that has come
back to itself; in Cartesian (!) terms, it attains the highest self-certainty.
The error of this German Idealism-if in these domains
such a judgment can be made at all-is not that it was too "far
from life"; just the opposite: this philosophy moved completely
and fully in the domain of modern Dasein and of Christianity,
instead of posing beyond "beings" the question of being. German
Idealism was too close to life, and in a certain way it itself gave birth
to what supplanted it, namely, the non-philosophy of positivism
which is now celebrating its biologistic triumphs.
104. German Idealism
Here truth becomes the certainty that develops into an unconditioned
trust in spirit and so unfolds for the first time as spirit in its absoluteness.
Beings are completely transposed into objectivity, and objectivity
is in no way overcome through "sublation"; on the contrary,
objectivity extends to the representing I and to the relation of representing
the object and representing the representation. Machination
as the basic character of beingness now lapses into the form of the
subject-object dialectic, which, as absolute, plays out to their end
and orders together all possibilities of every known realm of beings.
Here once again is sought complete security against all uncertainty,
Le., a conclusive grip on the correctness of absolute certainty but also,
unwittingly, an evasion of the truth of beyng. No bridge leads from
here to the other beginning. Yet it is precisely this thinking of German
Idealism that we must know, for it brings the machinational
power of beingness into its extreme, unconditioned development (it
elevates the conditionedness of the ego cogito into the unconditioned)
and prepares the end.
Instead of becoming deposited in the banality of immediate evidence,
the obviousness of being is now systematically extended to
the wealth of the historicality of the spirit and of the forms of the
spirit.
160 III. The Interplay [204-205]
In between, there are scattered single advancements. An example
is Schelling's disquisition on freedom, which admittedly can lead to
no decision, as the transition to "positive philosophy" shows.
105. HOlderlin-Kierkegaard-Nietzsche
No one today may be so presumptuous as to consider it a mere coincidence
that these three had to come to an untimely end, they who,
each in his own way, at last suffered most deeply the uprootedness to
which Western history is driven and who at the same time surmised
their gods most intimately.
What is being prepared?
What is involved in the fact that Holderlin, the earliest of these three,
also becomes the one who poetized the furthest ahead at a time when
thinking once again aspired to an absolute knowledge of the entire
previous history? (Cf. UberZegungen TV, p. 115ff.)
What hidden history of the much-invoked nineteenth century occurred
here? What law of motion of what is to come is being prepared
here?
Must we not now turn our thinking around to very different domains
and measures and ways to be, in order that we might still belong
to the newly dawning necessities? Or does this history remain
inaccessible to us as a ground of Dasein, not because it is past but, on
the contrary, because it is still too futural for us?
106. The decision with regard to all "ontology" in carrying out the
confrontation between the first and the other beginning
In the transition to the latter from the former, meditation on "ontology"
is necessary, so much so that the thoughts developed in "fundamental
ontology" must be thought through. For in it the guiding question
is for the first time grasped as a question, elaborated, and made
visible in relation to its ground and in its structure. A mere rejection of
"ontology," without an overcoming of it out of its origin, accomplishes
nothing whatsoever beyond endangering every will to thinking. For,
such rejection (e.g., in Jaspers) takes a very questionable concept of
thinking as its paradigm and then discovers that, through this thinking,
"being"-meant in great confusion are beings as such-is not attained
at all but is merely wedged into the framework and cast of that
concept. Behind this remarkably superficial "critique" of "ontology" (a
critique which rambles on and on while muddling up being and beings
§107 [205-206] 161
to the highest degree), nothing else is in effect than the distinction between
form and content. This distinction is not at all interrogated with
regard to its origin and yet is carried over "critically" to "consciousness"
and to the subject and its "irrational" "lived experiences." Thus what is
here in effect is the Rickert-Lask type of Kantianism, which Jaspers,
e.g., has never shed, in spite of everything.
Versus such a "critique" as a simple rejection of "ontology," it must
be shown why the latter became necessary (predominance of Platonism)
within the history of the guiding question. Conversely, an
overcoming of ontology therefore requires in the first place precisely
an unfolding of ontology out of its beginning, in contrast to the superficial
acceptance of its doctrinal content and the calculation
(Nicolai Hartmann) of its strengths and shortcomings. All of that
remains superficial and thus surmises nothing whatever of the
thoughtful willing which in Being and Time seeks a way of transition
from the guiding question to the basic question.
Every ontology (whether fully developed as such or still inchoate) is
like the history of the first beginning in asking about beings as beings
and in this respect-only in this respect-asking about being.
Therefore every ontology proceeds into the domain of the basic question
(How does being essentially occur? What is the truth of being?),
though of course without surmising this basic question as such and
without ever acknowledging beyng in its highest question-worthiness,
uniqueness, finitude, and strangeness.
To be shown: how the development of ontology into onto-theology (d.,
for example, lecture course on Hegel 1930-3PO) confirms the final
suppression of the basic question and its necessity and how in this
history Nietzsche completes the creative end.
107. The answer to the guiding question and the form of
traditional metaphysics
In accord with the Platonic interpretation of beings qua beings as
eiOO<;-iOEa: and of the iOEa: as KOIVDV, the being of beings becomes altogether
the KOIVDV. To be the "most general" becomes the essential
determination of being itself. The question of the Tl EO'TlV ["what it
is"] is always the question of the KOIVDV, and thereby is given for the
entire thinking of beings as such the framework of highest genus
(highest universality) and specification. The main realms of beings are
10. Lecture course, HegeZs PhiinomenoZogie des Geistes, winter semester 1930-31
(GA32).
162 III. The Interplay [206-208]
precisely sheer specia/ia of the universality of beings, i.e., of the universality
of being. And in this way the character of the guiding question
is reflected in the distinction between metaphysica generalis and
metaphysica specialis. In the guiding question, a possible coupling of
metaphysica generalis and metaphysica specialis is no longer an issue at
all, since they are indeed coupled in the way just named, a way that
is very external to beings and afortiori external to beyng. Utterly
groundless pseudo-questions arise here as long as the unrecognized
basis of the guiding question and the distinction between the two
disciplines are from the start taken to be self-evident.
The confusion increases altogether if a solution to the question is
sought with the help of the "ontological" difference developed in fundamental
ontology. For this "difference" is indeed not a way of approach to
the guiding question; it aims instead at a leap into the basic question. And
it does so not in order to play vaguely with henceforth fixed terms (beings
and being) but, rather, in order to go back to the question of the truth of
the essential occurrence of beyng and thus to grasp in a different way the
relation between beyng and beings, especially since also the interpretation
of beings as such is transformed (sheltering of the truth of the event)
and it becomes impossible to unwarily smuggle "beings" in as "represented
objects," "things objectively present in themselves," or the like.
108. The basic metaphysical positions within the history of the
guiding question and their respective interpretations of time-spacell
1. How space and time are experienced, grasped, and named in the
first beginning. What does "mythological" interpretation mean
here?
2. How both themselves enter into the realm of beings, the realm of
what is constantly present, and are in part ll~ av.
3. The fact that the domain of truth for being remains closed off and
unknown here.
4. To what extent neither possible nor necessary to think space and
time (place and now) back into their origin (appertaining to
aA~geHx).
5. How space and time then become schematic representations in the
course of their interpretation with respect to llEye9o<;
["extension"] .
6. How this postulation is then appropriated in modern, "mathematical"
thinking.
11. Cf. The grounding.
§11O [208-209] 163
7. How the discrepancy in their essence and in their relation to the
'T' and to "consciousness" ultimately comes to count in Leibniz
and Kant as something fixed and conceptually determined, which
happened earlier with the interpretation of beings as oUola. (How
even Nietzsche does not ask radical questions here.)
109. '18£a:
is that interpretation of aA~8Ela which prepares the later determination
of beingness as objectivity and necessarily forecloses to the entire
history of Western philosophy the question of aA~8Ela as such.
Only another inceptual thinking of being and of its relation to Dasein
can give rise to the question of what was called aA~8Ela in the
thinking of the first beginning.
110. The iOEa:, Platonism, and idealisml2
1. The concept of to£a (doo<;): the look of something, what something
gives itself out to be and makes of itself, that in which
something is set back and thus is the being it is. Although i8£a is
related to tOEiv (vo£lv), the word does precisely not mean the represented
of a representing. On the contrary, it means the shining
forth of the look itself, what offers up a view and does so for a gaze.
The word does precisely not signify a relation to the "subject" in
the modern sense. It refers rather to the presencing, the shining
forth, of the view in the look and specifically as that which in
coming to presence provides constancy at the same time. Here originates
the distinction between the Tl fonv ["what it is"] (essentia, quidditas)
and on ["that it is"] (existentia) in the temporality of the iO£a (d.
The leap). A being is a being in virtue of constant presence, to£a,
the seen in its seen-ness (aA~8Ela).
2. The iO£a: that to which the changing, many things are referred
back, the unifying One. Therefore: QV, being [seiend] = unifying. As
a consequence, with respect to its many instantiations (£KaOTa) the
t8£a is the KotVOV, and the KOtvOV, this later-derived determination
of the to£a as beingness, then remarkably becomes the first
and ultimate determination of beingness (or of being). And so
12. Cf. The leap, 119. The leap is prepared by asking the basic question; d. lecture
course, Grundfragen der Philosophie: Ausgewiihlte "Probleme" der "Logik." winter semester
1937-38 (GA45). p. 60ff.
164 III. The Interplay [209-210]
being is the "most general"! Yet this is not strange; it is necessary,
because from the beginning on, being is experienced and thought
as beingness only on the basis of "beings," so-called beings, i.e.,
only on the basis of the many and also back to them.
3. Once the is£a is postulated as the beingness of beings and is conceived
as the KOlVOV, then, thought of again on the basis of socalled
beings (namely, the individuals), the is£a must be in relation
to these the ovrw<; ov, what is most eminently. The is£a
especially, indeed the is£a alone, satisfies the essence of beingness
and may therefore claim to count as what is most eminently, a
being in the most proper sense. What is individual and changeable
thus becomes ll~ ov, i.e., what does not ever satisfy beingness.
4. If being (always as beingness, KOlVOV) is grasped in this way as EV,
as what is most eminently and what is one and most unifying, and
if the is£al themselves are many, then these many as the highest
forms of beings can be only in the manner of the KOlVOV, i.e., in a
KOlvwvia ["community"] among themselves. Therein are gathered
the presence and constancy of beingness, i.e., unity; the Y£Vl1
as unities: self-unifying and in that way generators, "genera."
5. The interpretation of ov as oucria-the latter understood as is£a
(KOlVOV, yev~)-grasps the beingness of beings and thus also the
elval (being but not beyng) of ov. In beingness (oucria), being
(eival) is surmised as what is in some way other, what is not completely
fulfilled in oucria. Therefore, the task is to advance along
the same path, the path characterized by a grasp of presencing,
and proceed beyond beingness: €1t£KelVa r~<; oucria<; (d. Ubungen,
"Die metaphysischen Grundstellungen des abendHindischen
Denkens {Metaphysik}," winter semester 1937-38). Because this
questioning asks only about beings and their beingness, however,
it can never detach itself from beings and strike up against beyng
itself. The €1t£KelVa can therefore be determined only as something
that henceforth characterizes beingness in terms of its relation
to the human being (eMalllovia ["happiness"]), as the aya90v,
the useful, the ground of all usefulness, thus as condition for "life,"
for the \jJUX~, and accordingly as the very essence of the \jJux~.
Thereby the step is taken over to "value," to "meaning," to the
"ideal." The guiding question of beings as such is here already at its
limit and likewise at a place where it relapses and henceforth values
beingness, instead of grasping it in a more original way, and
values it such that value itself is declared to be what is highest.
6. In unity with this, the relations of the is£a itself to the \jJuX~ now
also become clear and prescriptive:
a) as eiSo<; in relation to iSelv and voelv-vou<;
§110 [210-211] 165
b) as the KOlVOV and KOlVWVta in relation to IhaAey£o9at ["discussing"]
and AOYOC,
c) as the aya90V-KaAOV ["good-beautiful"] in relation to EPWC,
["love"].
7. Because the essence of beings is in this way gathered in the tPUX~,
the latter itself is the apx~ ~wfjc, ["origin of life"], and ~w~ is the
basic form of beings.
Here, as also in Aristotle, tPux~ does not mean subject; accordingly,
something essential is posited with this relation of OV as
ouota:
a) beings as such are always the over and against, i.e., ob-jects,
b) what is over and against is itself what is constantly present,
constantly at hand, and is in the most eminent sense; its being
does not need to be questioned.
8. The f:1teK£lVa rfjc, ouotac, as apx~ rou ovroc, ["origin of beings"] possesses,
inasmuch as it is the measure of £UOal\ . lOVta, the character
of the 9£tov ["divine"] and 9£oc, ["god"]; d. Aristotle.
The question of beings as such (in the sense of the guiding
question), i.e., ontology, is thus necessarily theo-Iogy.
9. This unfolding of the first end (in Platonic-Aristotelian philosophy)
of the first beginning makes it possible that this PlatonicAristotelian
philosophy and, in its form, henceforth Greek philosophy
in general could then provide the framework and
foundation for Judeo-Christian (Philo-Augustine) faith and from
this point of view could even be taken as a forerunner of Christianity,
precisely as the "paganism" that has been overcome.
10. Not only do Christianity and its "world" -interpretation have here
their framework and the predelineation of their constitution, but
so do all post-Christian, anti-Christian, and non-Christian Western
interpretations of beings, human beings included. The f:1teK£lVa
rfje, ouotac, as aya90v (which means the fundamental renunciation of
any further, original questioning into beings as such, i.e., into
being) is the prototype for all interpretation of beings and of their
determination and configuration in the framework of a "culture."
Moreover, it is the prototype for reckoning in accord with cultural
values, for the interpretation of "reality" in terms of its "meaning,"
for the appraisal of "ideas" and the measuring up to ideals. It is the
prototype for the forming of an i8ea, for a view of beings as a
whole, a view of "the world," i.e., it is the prototype for worldview.
Where "worldview" determines beings and dominates,
Platonism is at work in an undiluted and unrecognized way; and
Platonism becomes all the more tenacious when it has gone
through the modern reinterpretation of the i8ea.
166 III. The Interplay [211-213]
II. The foremost subsequent-and more appropriate-version of
Platonism (the theory of Ideas as theory of the beingness of beings)
is not "idealism," but "realism"; res: the "what," the thing;
realitas as whatness, essentia, the genuine medieval "realism"; the
universale constitutes the ens qua ens.
12. Through nominalism, however, the "this," the factuality of the
individual, becomes the genuine realitas, and realitas is accordingly
claimed for the distinguishing characteristic of the individual, for
what is immediately present at hand here and now, for existentia.
Remarkable: the term "reality" now comes to mean "existence,"
"actuality," "thereness" ["Existenz," "Wirklichkeit," "Dasein"].
13. For various motives, the individual, the individual soul, the individual
human, the "I," is experienced correspondingly as what
most eminently is, as the most real being, and only in that way is
the ego cogito-ergo sum possible at all. In this assertion, "being" is
attributed to the individuum, whereby it is to be noted that the assertion
properly refers to the certainty of the mathematical relation
between cogitare and esse; the axiom of mathesis.
14. Now no longer does {SEa signify the universale as such in the Greek
sense of the dSo~ of presencing; it refers instead to the perceptum
grasped in the percipere of the ego. It means "perceptio" in the ambiguity
of our word "representation" [Vor-stellung]. If {SEa is taken so
broadly, then even what is individual and changeable is a perceptum.
The {SEa as perceptum: the idea in its shining back. The {SEa as
£iSo~: the idea in the shining forth of presencing. It is only the interpretation
of {SEa as perceptio that turns Platonism into an "idealism":
the beingness of beings now becomes representedness, and beings
are thought of "idealistically" (esse = verum esse = certum esse = ego
percipio, cogito me cogitare). Consequently, in Kant the "ideas" are
indeed saved, but only as representations and principles of "reason"
qua human reason.
From here the step to absolute idealism. Hegel's concept of
"ideas" (d. the following excursus), the absolute self-appearance to
itself of the absolute as absolute knowledge. Thereby possible to
grasp Plato in a new way and assign Greek philosophy to the phase
of immediacy. (Cf. on "idealism": "Ubungen, Nietzsches metaphysische
Grundstellung: Sein und Schein," summer semester
1937, and on nominalism: "Ubungen, Die metaphysischen Grundstellungen
des abandlandischen Denkens {Metaphysik}," w. s.
1937-38.)
§llO [213-214]
*
Hegel's concept of the idea;
and the first possibility of a philosophical history of philosophy
from its first end
167
In this concept, all essential determinations of the history of the idea
are contained and originarily brought to completion:
1. idea as appearing
2. idea as the determination of the knowable (the actual) as such
3. idea as the universality of the "concept"
4. idea represented in the representing, thinking of the "absolute";
Philo, Augustine
5. idea the cognized in the cogito me cogitare (self-consciousness)
(Descartes)
6. idea as perceptio, the representing that develops in phases unitarily
with willing; perceptio and appetitus (Leibniz)
7. idea as the unconditioned and the "principle" of rationality (Kant)
8. All these determinations are originarily unified in the essence of
self-mediating absolute knowledge which knows itself as the
completion not only of every form of consciousness but even of
all previous philosophy.
9. From a philosophical point of view, what comes after Hegel is entirely
deterioration and a relapse into positivism and life-philosophy
or scholastic ontology, and from a scientific point of view it
is the diffusion and rectification of many cognitions regarding
the idea and its history. Even in this learned consideration, however,
Hegelian points of view are still always operative, although
they are often scarcely recognizable and are unable to make explicit
their power to influence metaphysics. It is from these obscure
sources that contemporary "philosophy" draws its "concepts"
of "idea" (d. The grounding, 193. Da-sein and the human
being, esp. p. 248f.).
10. Since, with this founding of the "idea" as the actuality of the actual,
Hegel gathered the entire earlier (even pre-Platonic) history
of philosophy into an affiliation, and since he conceived of such
knowledge in its phases and their sequence as absolute selfknowledge,
he thus came into possession of a necessity arising
out of the essence of beingness (idea), a necessity according to
which the phases of the history of the ideas had to form themselves
into those phases.
In other words, Hegel's history of philosophy, seen in terms of his
way of questioning, was the first philosophical history of philosophy,
168 III. The Interplay [214-215]
the first appropriate interrogation of history but also the last, and last
possible, interrogation of that kind.
On the whole, what has followed has been important scholarship,
but basically-i.e., philosophically-it amounts to helpless and distracted
blather whose unity derives only from the succession of the
philosophers and of their writings or "problems."
That which pertains to the concept of "idealism "13
1. the iSEa as the presencing of the "what" and as the constancy of
such presencing (but this is not grasped and incurs forgottenness,
and through misinterpretation it becomes the ens entium as
aeternum!);
2. vO£lv (Myo<;), but not yet fixed in the "I"-instead, ljJux~, ~w~;
3. nonetheless predelineated thereby: the perceptum (what is represented,
what can be brought before oneself, what is present) of a
percipere, which is ego percipio as cogito me cogitare; the co-representing
of oneself as that to whom something is represented and that in
whose sight and countenance the look of something appears;
4. representedness of an ob-jectivity [Gegen-standlichkeit]. and "seW
(I) -certainty as the ground of objectivity, i.e., the ground of beingness
(being and thinking).
*
15. In the sense of the strictly historical concept of "idealism," Plato
was never an "idealist." Rather, he was a "realist," which does not
mean that he did not deny the external world in itself. It means
instead that he taught the iSEa as the essence of av, the realitas of the
res. Yet "idealism," precisely in its modern guise, is indeed Platonism,
inasmuch as modern idealism also maintains that beingness
must be grasped in terms of "representing" (vo£lv), i.e.,
(under Aristotelian influences) in terms of Myo<; as Slavo£lcreal
["thinking through"]. i.e., in terms of thinking, which according
to Kant is the representing of something in general (categories
and the table of judgments; categories and the self-knowledge of
reason for Hegel). All in all: the paradigm for the entire history
of Western philosophy, Nietzsche included: being and thinking.
Although Nietzsche experiences beings as becoming, he is an opponent
who still remains inside the traditional framework with
this interpretation; beings are simply interpreted differently, but
the question of being is never posed as such.
13. Cf. Ubungen, summer semester 1937, Nietzsches metaphysische Grundstellung:
Sein und Schein.
§llO [215-217] 169
16. If we consider that the predominance of Platonism in its various
orientations and forms now also governs (in fact especially for
Nietzsche) the view of pre-Platonic philosophy, then we can see
the significance attaching to the decisive interpretation of QV as
i15ea and thereby also to the question of what genuinely took
place here.
17. At issue in these considerations is not a history of Platonism in
the sense of a series of doctrinal views as variations on Platonic
theory. At issue is solely the history of the ways of dealing with
the guiding question under the essential dominance of Platonism,
with the task of playing over from the first to the other
beginning. Platonism understood accordingly: the concept of
that questioning of being which asks about the beingness of beings
and places being, grasped in this way, into relation with
representing (thinking). Being and thinking: the title for the history
of thought within the first and the other beginning.
18. An essential supplement to this history is the exposition of the
history of aA~e£la, the history of its all-too-early collapse and of
its transformation into 0llOtWOU; ["correctness"] and adaequatio
and from there into certainty. This history then leads to the corresponding
disregard of the question of truth; finally, in Nietzsche,
only the question of the value of truth, a genuinely Platonizing (I)
question. Everything far removed from the task of questioning
the essence of truth as such in its most intimate relation to the
truth of beyng and thus to beyng itself.
19. Arising out of the Platonic interpretation of beings is a mode of
representation which in various forms radically rules over the
subsequent history of the guiding question and thereby also
over Western philosophy as a whole. The determination of the
i15ea as the K01VOV turns the XWP10110<; into a sort of being, and
that is the origin of "transcendence" in its various forms, especially
if even the £1teK£lVa is grasped as ouota on account of this
determination of the i15ea. Here is also the root of the representation
of the apriori.
20. "Transcendence" is understood in various senses which at the
same time are interconnected:
a) Transcendence in the "ontic" sense: one being surpassing all
others, or for Christianity the generator that surpasses generated
beings, the Creator and (in the very confused use of the
word "transcendence") the "Transcendence" (as in "His Magnificence!")
= God himself, the being that is above and beyond
all other beings, the encompassing and thus the universal, the
170 III. The Interplay [217-218]
being which (needlessly and excessively adding to the confusion)
is also called "being" ["Sein"]!
b) Transcendence in the "ontological" sense refers to the surpassing
that resides in the KOIVOV as such, namely, beingness as the
general (yev~-categories-"beyond" and "prior to" beings,
apriori). Here the relation and the type of distinction remain
very unclear; one is satisfied with ascertaining the KOIVOV and
its consequences.
c) Transcendence in the sense of the "fundamental ontology" of
Being and Time. Here the word "transcendence" receives again
its original meaning: the surpassing as such, grasped as the
distinctive feature of Da-sein, indicating thereby that Da-sein
in each case already stands in the open realm of beings. Connected
up to this one and thereby determined more precisely
is "transcendence" in the "ontological" sense, inasmuch as the
transcendence pertaining to Dasein is grasped originarily and
precisely as an understanding of being. Now, however, since understanding
is in turn taken to be thrown projection, transcendence
means to stand in the truth of beyng, of course
without at first knowing this or questioning it.
Because Da-sein as Da-sein originally endures the open
realm of concealment, we cannot in the strict sense speak of a
transcendence of Da-sein; in the sphere of this determination,
the representation of "transcendence" in every sense must
disappear.
d) This representation does find frequent employment in "epistemological"
considerations. Beginning with Descartes, these
deny that the "subject" can immediately go out of itself and
transcend itself to attain the "object," or else they cast doubt
on this relation. The introduction of Da-sein overcomes even
this type of "transcendence," for it is thus bypassed right from
the start.
e) "Transcendence" always involves departing from known and
familiar "beings" and going out in some way beyond them.
From the perspective of the basic question of the truth of beyng,
that amounts to a remaining mired in the mode of inquiry of
the guiding question, i.e., in metaphysics.
Yet all metaphysics is overcome in the transition to the basic
question.
This transition, however, must therefore meditate all the
more clearly on the forms of Platonism that still hem it in and
are unavoidable, even if they determine the transition only as
forms which are to be averted.
§llO [218-219] 171
21. The last scions and consequences of Platonism in the present:
a) everything that calls itself "ontology" and everything that
wants to be, or does not want to be, ontology; even its oppositions-
e.g., the one based on a Kantianism-remain within
the same realm of conditions for "ontologies."
b) all Christian and non-Christian metaphysics.
c) every theory that adopts "values," "meaning," "ideas," and
ideals; likewise, the theories (positivism and biologism) that
deny these.
d) any kind of "life" -philosophy, to which the question of beingeven
in the proper form of the earlier guiding question-remains
alien (Dilthey).
e) every single one of those trends that mix up all of the above,
teach ideas and values, and at the same time emphasize "existence"
[" Existenz"] in the manner of "life" -philosophy. Here
the most extreme confusion is raised to a principle, and all
genuine thinking and questioning is abandoned.
f) finally, Nietzsche's philosophy, which, precisely because it understands
itself as an inversion of Platonism, re-falls into itthrough
the back door, so to speak. Even where Nietzsche, as
a thinker who "goes over," does ultimately twist free from Platonism
and from its inversion, he still does not achieve an originary
interrogation of the truth of beyng and of the essence of
truth, an interrogation that would lead to an overcoming.
22. On the other hand, Nietzsche was the first to recognize the key
position of Plato and the bearing of Platonism on the history of the
West (ascent of nihilism). More precisely, he had an intimation of
the key position of Plato; for Plato's position between pre-Platonic
and post-Platonic philosophy becomes visible only if the prePlatonic
is grasped out of itself in a primordial way and not, as in
Nietzsche, interpreted Platonically. Nietzsche remained mired in
this interpretation because he did not recognize the guiding question
as such and did not carry out the transition to the basic question.
Yet Nietzsche did (and this for the moment has greater weight)
track down Platonism in its most covert forms: Christianity and its
secularizations are thoroughly "Platonism for the people."
23. In its overt and covert dominance, Platonism has placed beings as a
whole (and in the way they have been considered and been formed
during the course of Western history) into a definite condition and
has turned definite directions of representation into self-evident
ways of "questioning" (d. above, "transcendence"). That is the genuine
impediment to experiencing and leaping into Da-sein, and it
is so severe that at first Da-sein is not understood, especially since
172 m. The Interplay [219-221]
the necessity of its grounding does not become dear, on account of
the lack of need for such a necessity. This lack, however, is based in
the abandonment by being as the deepest mystery of the current history
of Western humanity.
24. In order to create a readiness for the leap into Da-sein, we thus
face the unavoidable task of initiating an overcoming of Platonism
through a more original knowledge of its essence.
25. Accordingly, we must ask:
a) which experience and interpretation serve to found the determination
of beings as iSEa?
b) Which truth (of which essence) gives footing to the determination
of the beingness (ouota) of beings, av, as iSEa?
c) If this truth remained undetermined, and it did remain so,
why was it not questioned?
d) If such questioning did not seem necessary, what are the
grounds for that? It can only be because the interpretation of
beingness as iSEa completely satisfied the questioning of beings
and drove out all other questioning from the very outset.
And that in turn must be grounded in the uniqueness of the
interpretation of beings.
e) This interpretation projects beings upon constant presence.
The iSEa essentially occurs as constant presence and makes
every step beyond that impossible; for here being gives itself
in this essential occurrence such that beings completely satisfy
everything which is. Essential occurrence as presence and
constancy leaves no room for something that would not be
satisfied therein and thus presents no motive for questioning
the truth of this interpretation; essential occurrence as presence
and constancy confirms itself as that which confirms all
beings as such. Beingness as iSEa thereby is of itself what truly
(aAllew~) is, av.
f) This interpretation of beings henceforth assigns to mankind a
distinct ontological place: the beings that truly are, as constantly
present, are in each case the over and against, the look
that offers itself to a countenance; and the human being is
that extant thing which is related to what stands over and
against and which is itself induded therein; in reflection, humans
can even be their own over and against; the later development
of consciousness, object, and "self-consciousness" is
thereby prepared.
g) The fact nevertheless remains that, together with the inceptual
interpretation of av as <puot~, aA~e£ta came to be experienced
§llO [221-222] 173
and seen. Accordingly, there is more in the first beginning
than in the Platonic interpretation. In the confrontation the
first beginning must therefore be placed back into its unadulterated
greatness and uniqueness; the confrontation does not
sublate it but instead first grounds its necessity for the other
beginning.
26. The overcoming of Platonism in this direction and style is a historical
decision of the greatest proportions and at the same time is
the founding of a different sort of philosophical history of philosophy
in comparison to Hegel's. (What is developed in Being and Time
as "destruction" is not a dismantling in the sense of a demolishing.
It is a purification aimed at laying bare the basic metaphysical positions.
Yet all of that is mere prelude with respect to the carrying
out of the resonating and interplay.)
27. In the first beginning and in its history, the truth of being as well
as the ground of this truth remain hidden, and that demands, on
the part of an originary re-asking of the question of being, a
transition to the basic question, how does beyng essentially occur?
And only that question can allow us to ask in a renewed way,
what are beings?
The most extreme and at the same time most insidious scion of
"idealism" emerges where idealism seems to be renounced and even
combated (where, e.g., German Idealism is accused of being far removed
from life). This scion of idealism takes the form of biologism,
which by its very essence is necessarily ambiguous and wants to be
such. For the proposal of "life" as the basic reality ("life" as the totality
of life and also as human "life") assures us of two main things:
Life as acting and doing is a going-further and a going-on and so is
directed beyond itself to "meaning" and "value," which signifies that
it is an "idealism." But, it can immediately be retorted, an "idealism"
not of the lifeform of representation and "consciousness" but of lived
experience and acting, i.e., living and experiencing; all this sounds "realistic"
and can even allow itself at any time to count, if necessary, also
and precisely as the highest idealism.
These ambiguities give the impression of breadth and depth but
are merely the consequences of the utter groundlessness of this
"thinking" which in a completely superficial way, and while purposely
closing its eyes to its own historical provenance, falsely turns
what is tangible into the highest, in order to gain the dubious advantage
of finding immediate approbation.
174 III. The Interplay [222-223]
111. The "apriori" and <pu(n~
i.e., TO rrpon::pov Tfj <puaa ["what is first by nature"]. <pual~ the paradigm
and the "earlier than," descent, origin.
The earliest, the first to come to presence, the presencing is <pual~
itself, though, in unity with aA~eau, immediately covered over by
the io£u.
How does such a question of the rrpon::pov arise? On the basis of
the io£u as the aVTw~ av.
The earliest in the essential occurrence is the essential occurrence
itself as that of beyng.
Apriori-from what goes before; the apriori only where the guiding
question, metaphysics.
In the transition, however, only apparently is the "apriori" still a
"problem": conceived in terms of the event, the relation between
beyng and beings is quite different.
112. The "apriori"
The apriori in the proper sense only where io£u, which means that
beingness (KOIVOV) as the aVTw~ av is more eminently and thereby is in
the first place a being [seiendj.
The apriori, in accord with the way Plato introduced it, will in the future
always mean for metaphysics that beingness comes before beings.
In company with the io£u, the apriori becomes the perceptia; i.e.,
the apriori is assigned to the ego percipio and thus to the "subject." In
other words, representing is now what comes before.
The "understanding af being," as determined in Being and Time, appeared
to be merely an extension of this representing that comes before,
and yet (understanding as pro-jection-Da-sein) it is completely
different; as transition, however, it does point back into metaphysics.
The truth of beyng and the essential occurrence of beyng are neither
what comes earlier nor what comes later.
Da-sein is the Simultaneity of time-space with what is true as a
being, and it essentially occurs as the grounding ground, as the "between"
and "middle" of beings themselves.
§1l4 [223-224] 175
113. 'IOsa: and OUOta:
The task is to show how all essential determinations of beings are acquired
out of the basic determination of beings (or of beingness) as
constant presence or, to put it better, with this determination as the defining
background.
According to that basic determ,ination, what is is what is all at once,
what can fulfill the possibility of the "all at once." From the "all at
once" is determined the successive, i.e., the preceding and the following
(later, cause and effect); note the Kantian interpretation of
causality.
It is characteristic of the subsequent period of metaphysics that the
temporal characterization is indeed employed to distinguish beings
respectively, but here already time is in play only as a number applied
to changing things, i.e., time is something that can be numbered, a
form by which to order changing things. Thus time is employed as a
framework. In other words, the more original essence of time never
comes to be experienced, as little as does that of space. OUOta: as "substance"
is in this way posited as time-free, so to speak, in order to be
determined afterwards as either "eternal" (infinite) or "temporal"
(finite). Metaphysics does not ever get beyond this framework. Being
and Time therefore seems to be self-evident!
114. On Nietzsche's basic metaphysical position14
There the question of "hierarchy" and indeed not with respect to "values"
in general and in themselves but with respect to being human:
the master and the slave.
How is this question connected to metaphysics and to the basic
metaphysical position? On that, d. the development of the guiding
question:
The human being and humankind [der Mensch und das Menschsein]
as questioner, as grounding truth.
14. CL on the will to power, lecture course, Nietzsche: Der Wille zur Macht als
Kunst, winter semester 1936-37 (GA43); on the eternal recurrence, lecture course,
Nietzsches metaphysische Grundstellung im abendlandischen Denken: Die ewige Wiederkehr
des Gleichen, summer semester 1937 (GA44); on both, Ubungen, Nietzsches
metaphysische Grundstellung: Sein und Schein, summer semester 1937.
176 III. The Interplay [224]
When and how is genuine "truth" (Le., at the same time, its overcoming
and transfiguration) made possible and transferred to the
"noble" one?
Truth as fixing and, because an equalizing, always necessary for
those who gaze up from below, but not for those who gaze in the opposite
direction.
In that sense, the question of hierarchy a transitional question; necessity
of distinction and uniqueness in order to carry out the opening
up of being.
Yet what must become more originary than this question are the
questions regarding time-space, Le., the question of truth as primordial
question regarding the essence of what is true (d. 37-3815 ).
15. Lecture course, Grundfragen der Philosophie: Ausgewiihlte "Probleme" der
"Logik," winter semester 1937-38 (GA45).
IV. THE LEAp!
1. Regarding NBeyng: d. Uberlegungen II, IV, V, VI, VII.

115. The disposition guiding the leap
The leap, that most daring venture in the course of inceptual thinking,
jettisons and leaves behind everything conventional. The leap expects
nothing immediate from beings; instead, and before all else, it leaps
into the belonging to beyng in the full essential occurrence of beyng as
event. In this way, the leap appears in the semblance of utter recklessness,
and yet the disposition motivating it is precisely that diffidence (d.
Prospect, 5. For the feW-For the rare, p. 13ff.) in which the will to restraint
surpasses itself toward steadfastness in withstanding the most
remote nearness of the hesitant withholding.
The leap is the venture of a first penetration into the domain of the
history of being.
116. The history of being
To bring about the preparedness for the transition from the end of
the first beginning and into the other beginning does not mean to
enter a "period" which simply has never occurred before; rather, it is
to step into a wholly other domain of history. The end of the first
beginning will still for a long while carryover into the transition and
indeed even into the other beginning.
As surely as the history of the end will drag on and, measured according
to incidents, will be "more alive," "more headlong," and
more confused than ever, so the transition itself will remain the
most question-worthy and especially the most difficult to recognize.
Humans-a few, unknown to one another-will prepare themselves
in the temporal-spatial playing field of Da-sein and will gather themselves
into a nearness to beyng, a nearness which must remain alien
to everything "close to life." In long spans of time, which to the history
of being are mere moments, that history knows rare events such
as: the assignment of truth to beyng, the collapse of truth, the entrenchment
of the distorted essence of truth (correctness), the abandonment
of beings by being, the entry of beyng into its truth, the
180 IV. The [228-2291
kindling of the hearth fire (of the truth of beyng) as the solitary site
of the passing by of the last god, and the flaring up of the non-repeatable
uniqueness of beyng. While the destruction of the outgoing
world, as self-destruction, screams out its triumphs into the void, the
essence of beyng gathers itself into its highest calling: as appropriating
eventuation, to assign the ground and the temporal-spatial playing
field, i.e., Da-sein in the singularity of its history, to the realm of
decision regarding the divinity of the gods.
Beyng as appropriating event is the victory of what is ineluctable in
the attestation of the god. But do beings fit into the conjuncture of
beyng? Is the human being to be endowed with the uniqueness of the
going-under instead of with desolation in progressive continuance?
The going-under is the gathering of everything great in the moment of
preparedness for the truth of the uniqueness and non-repeatability of
beyng. The going-under is the most intimate proximity to the refusal
in which the event bestows itself on the human being.
The entrance of the human being into the history of being cannot be
calculated in advance and is independent of all progress or regress of
"culture," as long as "culture" itself refers to the entrenchment of the
abandonment of beings by being and pursues an ever-greater mattingdown
of humanity in its "anthropologism" or even foists on the human
being once again the Christian obliviousness to all truth of beyng.
117. The leap
The meditation of "fundamental ontology" (laying of the foundation
of ontology as its overcoming) constitutes the transition from the end
of the first beginning to the other beginning. This transition, however,
is at the same time the run-up to the leap which alone can initiate
a beginning and especially the other beginning as constantly
surpassed by the first.
Prepared here in the transition is the most originary and thus the
most historical decision, that either-or which allows no hiding places
and no regions for evasion: either to remain trammeled to the end
and to its running out, i.e., to ever new variants of "metaphysics"
which become ever cruder, more groundless, and more aimless (the
new "biologism" and the like), or to initiate the other beginning, i.e.,
to be resolved toward its long preparation.
Since the beginning occurs only in the leap, even this preparation
must already be a leaping and, as preparatory, must originate in and
spring from the confrontation (interplay) with the first beginning
and with its history.
§1l7 [229-230] 181
What is wholly other of the other beginning, versus the first. can
be made clear through a saying that seems merely to play with an
inversion; but in truth everything is transformed.
In the first beginning, being (beingness) is inventively thought
(through vodv and AEYElY), envisioned, and posited in the open realm of
its essential occurrence so that beings might show themselves. In the
wake of this beginning, being (beingness) then becomes a urr6eE01<; or,
more precisely, the eXvurrOeEt'OV ["what is not hypothetical"] in whose
light all beings and nonbeings come to presence. In this way, beyng
reigns for the sake of beings. But this basic relation now undergoes two
interpretations which then join together and intermix: "being" as summum
ens becomes the causa prima of beings, each of which is understood
as ens creatum, and being as essentia or idea becomes the apriori of the
objectivity of objects.
Being becomes the most common, the emptiest. the best known, and
at the same time what is most eminently as that cause, "the absolute."
In all the variations and secularizations of Western metaphysics,
this can be recognized again: being in service to beings even if, as
cause, being would seem to be the master.
In the other beginning, however, beings are such as to bear the
clearing into which they themselves come to stand, and this clearing
essentially occurs as the clearing for the self-concealing, i.e., for
beyng as event.
In the other beginning, all beings are sacrificed up to beyng, and
only from there do beings as such receive their truth.
But beyng essentially occurs as event, the site of the moment of
decision regarding the nearness and remoteness of the last god.
Here, in the ineluctable usualness of beings, beyng is the most
unusual; and this strangeness of beyng is not a mode of its appearance
but is beyng itself.
In the grounding domain of the truth of beyng, i.e., in Da-sein,
the uniqueness of death corresponds to the unusualness of beyng.
The most frightful jubilation must be the dying of a god. Only the
human being "has" the distinction of standing in front of death, because
the human being is steadfastly in beyng: death the highest
testimony to beyng.
In the other beginning, the truth of beyng must be ventured as
grounding, as inventive thought of Da-sein.
Only in Da-sein does beyng attain the grounding of that truth in
which all beings exist solely for the sake of beyng, beyng which lights
up as the trace of the path of the last god. The grounding of Da-sein
transforms the human being (seeker, preserver, steward).
182 IV. The Leap [230-231]
This transformation creates the space of the other necessities for the
decision regarding the nearness and remoteness of the gods.
118. The leap
is the extreme projection of the essence of beyng, of such a kind that
we place ourselves in what is thereby opened up, become steadfast,
and by being appropriated come to ourselves for the first time. For
the sake of an essential determination of beyng, however, must not
beings indeed continue to playa guiding role? Yet what does "guiding"
mean here? The delineation of being as that which in pregiven
beings is their most general character would merely be something
subsequent to the apprehension. The question would remain as to
why and in what sense beings "are" for us. There is always and in
advance a projection, and the question is only whether the projecting
one as projector does or does not leap into the projected path as it
opens up (d. The interplay, The first beginning). The question is
whether the projection itself is experienced and endured as an occurrence
out of the event, or whether that which gleams in the projection
is merely set back into itself as the emergent (cpuGl<;-i8£a) in
a self-releasing presentification.
Whence the ground of the decision regarding the direction and
range of the projection? Is the determination of the essence of beyng
subject to arbitrariness or, rather, to a highest necessity and thereby
to a plight? But the plight different in each case, according to the era
of being and its history; the concealment of the history of being (d.
The resonating, 57. The history ofbeyng and the abandonment by being).
In the other beginning, what matters is the leap into the fissuring
center of the turning of the event in order to prepare the "there"
with respect to its grounding and to do so knowingly, interrogatively,
and by forging a style.
We can never grasp beings by explaining and deriving them on
the basis of other beings. They can be known only out of their
grounding in the truth of beyng.
Yet how very seldom do humans advance into this truth. How
easily and quickly they make do with beings and thus remain disappropriated
of being. How compelling is the appearance of the superfluousness
of the truth of being.
§1l9 [232-233] 183
119. The leap
is prepared by asking the basic question2
This requires knowledge of the guiding question and of the transition.
The guiding question itself can be known only in its hitherto concealed
history (d. The interplay, llO. TheiS£u, Platonism, and idealism).
1. The first beginning and its ending encompass the entire history of
the guiding question, from Anaximander to Nietzsche.
2. The guiding question is not posed in the first beginning as an explicitly
formulated question. Yet for that very reason it is grasped
all the more originarily and is answered in a way that sets the
norm: the emergence of beings, the presencing of beings as such
in their truth, which latter is grounded in A6yoC; (gathering) and
vO£lv (apprehension).
3. The way from here to the first-and henceforth guidingformulation
of the question in Aristotle; the essential preparation
in Plato; the Aristotelian confrontation with the first beginning,
whereby that beginning receives an interpretation which becomes
fixed for those who come later.
4. The ramifications of the question in the formulation (doctrine of
categories; theo-Iogy) that now again steps back but still dominates
every result and every approach; the recasting of the whole
through Christian theology; in that form, the first beginning then
alone remains historical, even still in Nietzsche despite his discovery
of the inceptual thinkers as men of rank.
S. From Descartes to Hegel, another recasting but no essential
change; withdrawal into consciousness and absolute certainty;
with Hegel for the first time a philosophical attempt at a history of
the question of beings from the basic viewpoint of absolute
knowledge.
6. What lies between Hegel and Nietzsche takes many forms, but nowhere,
not even in Kierkegaard, is it metaphysically originary.
*
In contrast to the guiding question, the basic question as a formulated
question begins with the very formulation of the question in order to
leap from it back into the originary, basic experience of thinking the
truth of beyng.
2. Cf. The interplay.
184 IV. The Leap [233-2341
Even in its very however, the basic question has a completely
different character. It is not a continuation of Aristotle's formulation
of the guiding question. For it arises immediately out of a necessity
stemming from the plight of the abandonment by being, an
occurrence essentially co-conditioned by the history (and by the misunderstanding)
of the guiding question.
The displacement into the essence of beyng and accordingly the
asking of the precursory question (the question of the essence of
truth) are different from all objectification of beings and all immediate
access to them, whereby either the human being is altogether
forgotten or else beings, as the certain, are referred to the ''1'' and to
consciousness. On the other hand, the truth of beyng and thus the
essence of truth essentially occur only through steadfastness in Dasein,
through the experience of thrownness into the "there" out of
belonging to the call of the event.
*
In order for this wholly other questioning, as constancy in Da-sein,
to rise up at all to a decidable possibility, there must first be attempted,
specifically starting with the guiding question and through
its complete unfolding, a transition to the leap into the basic question;
there can never be attempted an immediate transition to the
basic question. It needs to be made clear that and why the question
of the truth (meaning) of beyng remains unasked in the guiding
question. This unasked question is the basic question, seen within the
purview and on the path of the guiding question and seen only by
way of an indication; time as the truth of beyng; beyng experienced
in the first beginning as various forms of presencing.
Being and Time is the transition to the leap (the asking of the basic question).
Therefore, as long as this attempt is accounted a "philosophy of existence"
["Existenzphilosophie"], everything remains uncomprehended.
"Time" as primordial temporality Signifies the originary unity of the
self-clearing and self-concealing transporting and provides the most
proximate ground for the grounding of Da -sein. This approach does not
mean that the previous form of the answer is to be retained or even replaced;
thus, it is not that instead of "ideas" (or their distortion in the
nineteenth century) and "values," other "values" or even no values at all
are to be posited. Instead, "time" (and, in correspondence, everything
included in the term "existence" ["Existenz"]) has here a completely different
kind of meaning, namely, that of the grounding of the open site of
the moment for the historical being of humans. Because all decisions
hitherto in the realm of "ideas" and "ideals" ("worldviews," cultural
ideas, etc.) are no longer decisions, since they no longer question their
§120 [234-235] 185
space of decision and still less interrogate truth itself as the truth of
beyng, therefore meditation must first be turned to the grounding of a
space of decision; i.e., before all else the plight of the lack of a sense of
plight, the abandonment by being, must be experienced. But where
everything in the domain of "culture," "ideas," "value," and "meaning"
retains its previous sense, even though modified by superficial borrowings
from the "philosophy of existence," there the abandonment by
being is entrenched anew (viewed from within the historicality of being
and inceptual thinking) and the lack of a sense of plight is, in a manner
of speaking, raised to a principle.
Nothing is surmised here of the incomparability of the basic position
in the other beginning, namely, that the leap, now as the question
of the essence of truth itself, first brings the human being into
the arena of the sudden occurrence and remaining absent of the
gods, their advent and absconding. It is only this that the other beginning
can will. Reckoned in the previous manner, that signifies
renunciation of validity and of applicability in the sense of a "worldview"
or "doctrine" or proclamation.
Not a proclamation of new doctrines to the bemired bustling about of
humans; instead, a dislodging of humans out of the lack of a sense of
plight and into the most extreme plight, namely, the plight of lacking
a sense of plight.
120. The leap
If we knew the law of the advent and absconding of the gods, then
we could begin to grasp something of the sudden occurrence and
remaining absent of truth and thus something of the essential occurrence
of beyng.
Beyng is assuredly not-despite a view that has long been customary
in the declining realm of the first beginning-the most general
property of beings and thus their emptiest determination, as if we already
knew "beings" and the task were merely to abstract that "general"
feature.
Nor is beyng some immense being, one which would cause all the
other, presumably known "beings" and would encompass them in
this way or that.
Beyng essentially occurs as the truth of beings. Regarding them a
decision is in each case already made through the essential occurrence
of beyng, even if that essential occurrence is grasped ever so roughly
and obliquely. Therefore the decision about truth is in every respect
made with the leap into the essential occurrence of beyng.
186 IV. The Leap [235-237]
What do we mean by this word "leap" which is easily misunderstood
here, as is every other word?
The leap is the leaping into a preparedness for the belonging to the
event. The event, viz., the intrusion and remaining absent, advent and
absconding of the gods, cannot be compelled by thinking; on the other
hand, thought can prepare the open realm which as time-space (site
of the moment) makes the fissure of beyng accessible and endurable in
Da-sein. Only in appearance is the event something carried out by
humans; actually, being human occurs as historical through the appropriation
that summons Da-sein in one way or another. The intrusion
of beyng which is granted to historical human beings does not
ever manifest itself to them immediately but only in a hidden way, in
the modes of the sheltering of truth. Yet the intrusion of beyng, as
seldom and sparse as it is, always comes out of the persistent remaining
absent of beyng, for the mass and endurance of the absence are not less
than those of the intrusion.
Beyng, as the essential occurrence of the event, is thus not an
empty, indeterminate sea of determinability into which we leap from
just anywhere inasmuch as we already "are." Instead, the leap first allows
the "there," as appertaining and appropriated in the call, to spring
forth as the site of the moment of some "where" and "when."
In the directions of its primordial manifestness and concealment,
the entire fissure of beyng is thereby already co-decided. It is possible
that the other beginning also may be able to hold fast to the event
and shelter it as the clearing again only in a unique lighting up corresponding
to the way <pU01<; alone (indeed scarcely and momentarily)
came into gatheredness (A.6yo<;) in the first beginning.
It is always only a few who arrive at the leap, and they do so on
different paths. By creating and sacrificing, they always are the ones
who belong to the grounding of Da-sein in the time-space of which
beings as beings are preserved and thereby the truth of beyng is sheltered.
But beyng is ever in extreme concealment and is transport
into the incalculable and unique, at the sharpest and highest crest
which both constitutes what is along the abyssal ground of nothingness
and itself grounds the abyss.
Clearing and concealing constitute the essential occurrence of truth
and may therefore never be taken as empty process or as object of
"knowledge" in the sense of a representing. Clearing and concealing,
in the manner of transporting and captivation, are the event itself.
Wherever and as long as it appears that there is an empty disclosure
(which could be carried out in itself) of an immediate access to beings,
then the human being is standing there only in the no-longer-grasped,
and indeed never-yet-grasped, outskirts of abandonment which remain
§121 [237-238] 187
left over and thus are still allowed and retained as the residue of an absconding
of the gods.
The most genuine and broadest leap is the one of thinking-not as
though the essence of beyng could be determined on the basis of
thinking (assertion) but because here, in know/edge of the event, the
fissure of being is penetrated the furthest and the possibilities of sheltering
the truth in beings can be gauged most extensively.
Thinking, as inceptual, grounds the time-space in its structure of
transporting and captivating and penetrates the fissure of beyng in
the uniqueness, freedom, contingency, necessity, possibility, and actuality
of the essential occurrence of beyng.
The grounding of the time-space does not project an empty table
of categories; instead, as inceptua/, thinking is intrinsically historical,
Le., determined by the plight of the lack of a sense of plight. Such
thinking reaches ahead into the necessities connected to the essential
shelterings of truth and of the guiding knowledge of it.
If it does break out, the plight of the lack of a sense of plight will
strike up against the remaining absent of both the advent and the
absconding of the gods. This remaining absent is all the more uncanny
the longer churches and forms of divine service survive (and
seem permanent) and yet are unable to ground an original truth.
The leap is a knowing one into the momentariness of the site of
the intrusion; it is that first move which leaps into the sheltering of
the appropriation in an indicative word (d. the essential occurrence
of beyng).
121. Beyng and beings
Place on one pan of a scale all things and objectively present beings, plus
the machinations in which they are congealed and entrenched, and
place on the other pan the projection of beyng, plus the weight of the
thrownness of the projection. In what direction will the pointer of the
scale lean? Toward the side of things objectively present in order to
allow the impotency of the projection to spring up into ineffectualness.
Yet who is weighing with this scale? What is objectively present?
What rages in machinations? All these issues never reach the truth
of beyng; they clothe themselves instead in the mere appearance of a
ground and of indispensability in that they withdraw from truth and
want to disavow their primary moment, objective presence, as a
nullity.
Who ordered this scale of the kind used in the market place and
demands that everything be weighed on it alone?
188 IV. The Leap [238-239]
Who leaps over this sort of weighing, ventures the unweighable,
and places beings back into beyng?
Where is the space for carrying that out? Is it not obvious that the
weighable must be, in order for the truth of beyng to occur essentially?
Yet must not the unweighable alone be ventured on the scale?
With respect to what is closest, usual, and continuous, beings will
always outdo beyng and drive it away. And that will not occur when
beings develop as gathered into themselves but, rather, when beings
become objects and states of dissembling machinations and are dissolved
into nonbeings. Here the most extreme dissipation of beyng
happens in the most ordinary publicness of beings that have become
a matter of indifference.
Can we gauge from here the untruth to which beyng must succumb?
Can we appreciate its truth, which stands opposed to dissipation,
essentially occurs as pure refusal, and possesses for itself
uniqueness and complete strangeness?
The stillest and steepest paths and passages must be found in order
to lead out of the already all-too-Iong-Iasting habituality and exhaustion
of beyng and to ground for beyng (in that which it itself appropriates
as event, i.e., in Da-sein) the site of its essential occurrence.
122. The leap
(the thrown projection)
is the carrying out of the projection of the truth of beyng, in the
sense of an entering into the open realm such that the projector of
the projection experiences himself as thrown, i.e., as appropriated by
beyng. The opening accomplished by the projection is an opening
only if it occurs as an experience of thrownness and thus of belonging
to beyng. That is what makes it essentially distinct from all merely
transcendental modes of knowledge regarding conditions of possibility
(d. The leap, 134. The relation between Da-sein and beyng).
The thrownness does testify to itself, however, and does so only in
the basic occurrences of the concealed history of beyng and indeed,
for us, above all in the plight of the abandonment by being and in the
necessity of the decision.
As the projector projects and speaks thoughtfully "of the event," it
is revealed that he himself, the more he projects, the more is he
thrown as one who is already thrown.
The opening up of the essential occurrence of beyng manifests
that Da-sein does not accomplish anything, except for catching on to
the oscillation of appropriation, i.e., entering into this oscillation and
§123 [239-240] 189
thus for the first time becoming itself: the preserver of the thrown
projection, the grounded one that grounds the ground.
123. Beyng
Let us venture the immediate utterance:
Beyng is the trembling of divinization (the trembling of the resonance
that announces the decision of the gods about their god).
This trembling expands the temporal-spatial playing field in which
the trembling itself comes into the open as refusal. In this way, beyng
"is" the appropriating event of the ap-propriation of the "there," of that
open realm in which it itself trembles.
Beyng must be thought out to this extremity. It thereby illuminates
itself as the most finite and richest, the most abyssal of its own
intimacy. For beyng is never a determination of the god as god;
rather, beyng is that which the divinization of the god needs so as to
remain nevertheless completely distinct from it. Neither is being (as
is the beingness of metaphysics) the highest and purest determination
of the 9£tov and Deus and of the "absolute," nor is it (as pertains
to this interpretation) the most general and most vacuous roof covering
everything of which it is not the case that it "is" not.
Yet, as refusal, beyng is not mere withholding and seclusion; on the
contrary, refusal is the intimacy of an allocation. What is allocated in
the trembling is the clearing of the abyssal "there." The "there" is allocated
as something to be grounded, as Da-sein.
Thus through the truth of beyng (for that is what this allocated
clearing is) the human being is claimed originarily and otherwise.
Through this claim of beyng itself, the human being is appointed as
the steward of the truth of beyng (being human as "care," grounded
in Da-sein).
Refusal is the most intimate compelling of the most originary and
ever-inceptual plight, a compelling into the necessity of defense
against the plight.
The essential defense is not supposed to ward off the plight so as to
get rid of it. In resisting it, the defense must instead precisely preserve
the plight and extend it into its being carried out in accord with the
diffusion of the trembling.
Therefore, beyng as the allocating refusal is the ap-propriation of
Da-sein.
Yet this ap-propriation tends toward what is proper to itself through
a trembling of divinization, and this divinization needs the temporalspatial
playing field for its own decision.
190 IV. The Leap [240-242]
The stewardship of the human being, however, is the ground of
another history. For this stewardship is not carried out merely by
keeping one's eye on objectively present things. It is instead a stewardship
that grounds. It must institute and shelter the truth of beyng
in "beings" themselves, which thereby once more-by entering into
beyng and its strangeness-develop the captivating simplicity of
their essence, pass over all machination, and withdraw from lived
experience so as to establish another dominance, i.e., domain, which
the last god has self-appropriated.
Only through great breakdowns and upheavals of beings do the
beings which have been constrained into machination and lived experience
and have already congealed into nonbeings come to give
way before beyng and thereby enter its truth.
Every weak mediation and vindication traps beings still more in the
abandonment by being and turns the forgottenness of being into the
one and only form of truth, namely, the form of the untruth of beyng.
How is even the smallest space supposed to be acquired here for the
presentiment that refusal is the first and highest gift of beyng, indeed its primordially
essential occurrence itself? Refusal eventuates as the withdrawal
that incorporates into the stillness in which truth, in accord with its
essence, comes anew to the decision as to whether it can be grounded
as the clearing for self-concealment. This self-concealment is the unconcealment
of the refusal; it is the allowance to belong in the strangeness
of another beginning.
124. The leap
To bring the essential occurrence of beyng into the grasping wordwhat
is ventured in such a project?
This knowledge, so inconspicuous and daring, can be withstood only
in the basic disposition of restraint. Then this is also knowledge that
every attempt to ground and explain the venture extrinsically, thus not
on the basis of what it ventures, falls short of that which is ventured and
undermines it. Is this knowledge then not a matter of arbitrariness?
Certainly; but the question still remains as to whether this arbitrariness
might not be the highest necessity of a compelling plight, of the plight
that forces into utterance the thoughtful saying of being.
125. Beyng and time
"Time" should become experience able as the "ecstatic" playing field of
the truth of beyng. Trans-position into the cleared region is supposed
§126 [242-243] 191
to ground the clearing itself as the open realm in which beyng gathers
itself into its essence. Unlike something objectively present, such an
essence cannot be proved; its essential occurrence must be expected
to arrive like a jolt. What comes first and remains for a long time: to be
able to wait in this clearing until the intimations arrive. For thinking
no longer possesses the advantages of a "system"; thinking is historical
in the peculiar sense that beyng itself as appropriating event bears all
history and therefore can never be calculated. In place of systematics
and deduction, there now stands historical preparedness for the truth
ofbeyng.
Such preparedness above all requires that this truth itself already
create, out of its scarcely resonating essence, the basic traits of its site
(Da-sein). The human subject must be transformed into the builder
and steward of that site.
At issue in the question of being is nothing other than the carrying
out of this preparation for our history. All "contents," "opinions,"
and "itineraries" within the particulars of the first attempt (Being and
Time) are contingent and can disappear.
What must remain, however, is the wide reach into the temporalspatial
playing field of beyng. This wide reach will take hold of everyone
who has become strong enough to think through the first decisions. In
the domain of these decisions and in conjunction with the era into which
we are consigned, a knowing seriousness is appropriate. This seriousness
no longer concerns itself with good and bad, decline and recovery of the
tradition, amiability and violence, but merely sees and grasps the things
that are, so as to help these beings (in which a distortion reigns as something
essential) into beyng and to bring history to its native soil.
Therefore Being and Time does not present an "ideal" or a "program."
Instead, it is the self-preparing beginning of the essential occurrence
of beyng itself-not what we think up but what compels us
(supposing we have become mature enough for it) into a thinking
which neither teaches a doctrine, nor calls forth "moral" action, nor
secures "existence" ["Existenz"], but which "merely" grounds truth as
the temporal-spatial playing field wherein beings can again be beings,
Le., can be for the sake of the preservation of beyng.
Because many of these preservations, and indeed exceptional
ones, are required to let beings arise in themselves at all, there must
be art, in whose work the truth is set.
126. Beyng, beings, and the gods
Beingness once became what is most eminently (ovrw<; ov), and following
this opinion beyng became the very essence of God, whereby
192 IV. The Leap [243-244J
God was conceived as the producing cause of all beings (the source of
"being" and thus itself necessarily the highest "beyng," what is most
eminently).
That makes it seem as if beyng (because transferred into this that is
most eminently) is valued the highest and thus also grasped in its essence.
Yet this is a misunderstanding of beyng and an avoidance of the
question of beyng.
Beyng attains its greatness only if it is recognized as that which
both the god of gods and all divinization need. What is "needed" is
opposed to all mere utilization. For it is the appropriating event of
the ap-propriation of Da-sein in which, as the essential occurrence of
truth, the stillest site is grounded, namely, the temporal-spatial playing
field of the passing-by, the unprotected "amidst" which unleashes
the storm of ap-propriation.
Beyng never is more fully than beings but also never less fully than
the gods, because these latter "are" not at all. Beyng "is" the "between"
amidst beings and the gods, utterly and in every respect incomparable,
"needed" by the gods and withdrawn from beings.
Therefore attainable only through the leap into the abandonment
by being as divinization (refusal).
127. The fissure
is the self-contained unfolding of the intimacy of beyng itself, to the
extent that we "experience" beyng as refusal and as the encompassing
refusal. If one wanted to attempt the impossible and grasp the
essence of beyng with the help of the "modalities" of "metaphysics,"
then one might say: refusal (the essential occurrence of beyng) is the
highest actuality of the highest possibility as possibility and is thereby
the first necessity (prescinding of course from the question of the
derivation of "modalities" out of ouota). This "clarification" of beyng
tears it from its truth (the clearing of Da-sein) and degrades it to a
pure and simple objectively present thing in itself. That is the worst
devastation which can befall a being. And here it is transferred to
beyng itself. Instead, we must try to think the fissure on the basis of
the fundamental essence of beyng, in virtue of which beyng is the
realm of decision for the battle among the gods. This battle is waged
over their advent and absconding; it is the battle in which the gods
first divinize and bring their god into a decision.
Beyng is the trembling of this divinization, trembling as the expanding
of the temporal-spatial playing field in which the trembling
itself, as refusal, appropriates to itself its clearing (the "there").
§129 [244-246] 193
The intimacy of this trembling requires the most abyssal fissure,
and in the latter the inexhaustibility of beyng might be inventively
thought by way of surmises.
128. Beyng and the human being
From what does the human being gain an intimation and representation
of beyng? The ready answer is: from an experience of beings.
But how is that to be understood? Does the experience of beings
merely remain an occasion, indeed the occasion, for forming the representation
of beyng? Or, instead, is beyng as beingness immediately
grasped "on" beings and "in" beings? Furthermore, the often-repeated
question immediately looms before us: how can beings be
experienced as beings unless something is already known of beyng?
Or is it precisely not from beings that one gains an intimation of
beyng but, rather, from that which alone is of equal rank with beyng,
as constantly appertaining to beyng, namely, from nothingness? Yet
how are we to understand nothingness here? (Cf. The leap, 129. Nothingness.)
In the sense of an excess of pure refusal. As "nothingness" gains in
richness, to that extent beyng gains in simplicity.
The first task, however, is to ground the truth of beyng. Only then
do we take the negative from the insidious word "nothingness" and
lend it the power of referring to the abyssal character of beyng.
Is it only the human being that has an intimation of beyng? How
do we know of this exclusivity? And is this surmising of beyng the
first, essential answer to the question of what the human being is?
For the first answer to that question is the transformation of it into
the form: who is the human being?
The human being has an intimation of beyng, is the surmiser of
beyng, because beyng ap-propriates the human being and does so
specifically such that the ap-propriation first needs something that
is self-proper, i.e., a self This selfhood has to be withstood in that
standing fast which allows the human being, by taking a stand in
Da-sein, to become the being that can be encountered only in the
who-question.
129. Nothingness
From the perspective of beings, beyng "is" not a being; it "is" a nonbeing
and so, according to the usual conception, nothingness. This way
of thinking is unassailable, especially if beings are taken in the sense
194 IV. The Leap [246-247]
of objects and objectively present things and nothingness signifies
the utter negation of beings understood in that sense. Thereby negation
itself has the character of an objective assertion.
This "negative" determination of "nothingness," in relation to the
most general and emptiest objective concept of "being," is indeed the
"most negative," and everyone immediately and readily feels antipathetic
to it. If our inquiry concerned only this acknowledged (though
not yet conceptualized) nullity, then such an inquiry could not claim
to place metaphysics in question and to determine the belonging together
of beyng and nothingness more originarily.
But what if beyng itself were the self-withdrawing and essentially
occurred as refusal? Is the latter a nullity or, rather, the highest gift?
Indeed, is it not primarily on account of this negativity of beyng itself
that "nothingness" is full of that assigning "power" the enduring of
which is the origin of all "creating" (beings coming to be more fully)?
If now the abandonment by being pertains to the "beings" of
machination and lived experience, can it be surprising that "nothingness"
is misinterpreted as sheer nullity?
If the "yes" of "making" and "lived experience" determines the
actuality of the actual so exclusively, then how reprehensible must
every "no" and "not" appear! For the decision regarding these always
depends on the immediate and unreflected way the customary "yes"
is raised to that pure and simple "yes" which lends measure to every
,t/no."
Yet the essential, "creative" "yes" is more difficult and rarer than
would be admitted by the usual affirmation of what is current, graspable,
and satisfying. Therefore those who dread and those who are
contemptuous of the "no" must always be interrogated first concerning
their "yes." And then it is often shown that they themselves are not
at all certain of their "yes." Could this be the reason they become the
allegedly valiant adversaries of "nothingness"?
Finally, what is the origin of the "yes" and the "no" and also of the
distinction and opposition between them? To put it in a different way:
who founded the distinction between the possibility of affirmation and
negation, the "and" of the affirmable and the negatable? Here all "logic"
fails, and metaphysics does so afortiori, since these indeed grasp beingness
only on the basis of thought.
The counter-turning must lie in the essential occurrence of beyng
itself, and the ground is ap-propriation as the refusal which is an assigning.
Then the "no" and the "not" would precisely be what is more originary
in beyng.
§130 [247-248] 195
130. The "essence" ofbeyng
If this essence is to be designated in a few words, then perhaps the
following turn of phrase will serve:
Beyng essentially occurs as the event of grounding the "there" or, in
short, as the event. Yet everything here is likely to be misinterpreted,
and even if the misinterpretations are rejected, it must always be borne
in mind that no formula can say what is essential, because formulas,
without exception, are wont to be thought and said on only one level
and in only one respect. A preliminary clarification, however, might
help overcome what is formulaic here.
The event of grounding the "there" is meant in the sense of the
genitivus objectivus: the "there," the essential occurrence of truth in its
grounding (the more original moment of Da-sein) is what is ap-propriated,
and the grounding itself clears the self-concealing, the event.
The turning and the belonging of truth (clearing of self-concealment)
to the essence of beyng.
What is true and, thereby, beings as well are first determined out of
the original essence of truth, indeed in such a way that now beings no
longer are; instead, beyng rises up toward "beings." In the other beginning
of thinking, beyng is therefore experienced as event, specifically
such that this experience, as springing forth, transforms all relations
to "beings." Henceforth humans-i.e., the essential human being and
the few of that kind-must build their history out of Da-sein, i.e.,
above all, must effectuate beings out of beyng toward beings. Not only
as before, such that beyng is something forgotten (merely and ineluctably
intended in advance) but such that beyng, its truth, explicitly
bears every relation to beings.
This demands restraint as the basic disposition which disposes
that stewardship in the time-space for the passing by of the last god.
The success or failure of this overturning of the human being as
hitherto (i.e., first of all, the grounding of a more original truth in beings
of a new history) cannot be calculated. It is instead given or withheld
by the appropriation itself, even if these present meditations already
think in advance the essential occurrence of beyng and know
the basic traits of that occurrence.
The ap-propriation of the grounding of the "there" requires, to be
sure, human cooperation, and that certainly signifies something essential
and perhaps something already impossible for humans today.
196 IV. The Leap [248-249]
For they must be extricated from the currently reigning basic conditions,
which amount to nothing less than the disavowal of all history.
Human cooperation requires especially the deepest preparation for
truth, for questioning the essence of what is true while dispensing with
every support in the findings and contrivances of machination.
In the other beginning, beings (those in a determinate domain
and region, or beings as such) can no longer be normative for beyng.
Here thought reaches so far ahead toward-or, better, into-the "there"
that the truth of beyng is lit up in an originary way.
Beyng becomes that which is alienating and specifically such that
the grounding of its truth heightens the strangeness and maintains all
beings of this beyng in the strangeness characteristic of beyng. The
utter uniqueness of the appropriating event and of all the momentariness
(which is assigned to this uniqueness) of Da-sein is fulfilled only
then. And only then is the deepest pleasure, out of its ground, set free
as the creativity which in the most reticent restraint is preserved from
deteriorating into a sheer, insatiable riot of blind drives.
131. The excess in the essence of beyng
(self-concealment)
This excess [Uber-majS] is not a mere quantitative surplus; it is instead
the self-withdrawing of all quantification and measuring. Yet, in this
self-withdrawing (self-concealing), beyng possesses its nearest nearness
in the clearing of the "there" and does so by appropriating
Da-sein.
The excesses of the appropriation belong to it itself but not in the
manner of a property, as if there could be ap-propriation without
excess.
To be sure, the excess is also not the "beyond" of a super-sensible
but, as ap-propriation, is the compelling of beings.
This excess is the self-withdrawing of measuring out, because it first
lets arise and holds open the strife and thus also both the space of the
strife and everything distant.
The strife of beyng against beings, however, is this self-concealment
of the restraint of an originary belonging.
Everywhere in this giving self-withdrawal, appropriation thus
possesses the character of self-concealment, which needs the broadest
clearing in order to occur essentially.
§132 [250-251] 197
132. Beyng and beings
This distinction has been understood ever since Being and Time as the
"ontological difference," and the aim has been to keep the question
of the truth of beyng safe from all admixture. But this distinction is
immediately applied to the path from which it originated. For there
beingness comes to validity as ouata, as {bEa, and, in its train, as objectivity
qua the condition of the possibility of an object. Accordingly,
the effort to go beyond the first approach to the question of being as
it was instituted in Being and Time and in the works which radiated
out from it ("On the Essence of Ground" and the Kant book3) required
various attempts to master the "ontological difference" and to
grasp its origin itself, i.e., its genuine unity. Therefore, the endeavor
had to be made to get free of the "condition of possibility" as a merely
"mathematical" retrogression and to grasp the truth of beyng out of
the latter's own essence (event). That explains why this distinction
has been so tormenting and discordant. For, as necessary as the distinction
is and even if it must be thought in terms of the tradition in
order to create a very first horizon for the question of beyng, it is just
as fatal-since it indeed arises precisely from an inquiry into beings
as such (beingness), and that path never leads immediately to the
question of beyng. In other words, it is precisely this distinction that
becomes the genuine barrier obstructing the taking up of the question
of beyng, insofar as the attempt is made, while presupposing the
distinction, to go beyond it and ask about its unity. This unity is always
no more than a reflection of the distinction and can never lead
into the origin from which it could be seen that the distinction no
longer is primordial.
Therefore, the task is not to surpass beings (transcendence) but,
instead, to leap over this distinction and consequently over transcendence
and to question inceptually out of beyng and truth.
In transitional thinking, however, we must withstand this discrepancy:
first, to bring this distinction to an initial clarity, and then
to leap over that very distinction. Yet such leaping over occurs only
through the leap as the creative grounding of the ground of the truth
of beyng, i.e., through the leap into the event of the appropriation of
Da-sein.
3. Kant und das Problem der Metaphysik (GA3).
198 IV. The Leap [251-252]
133. The essence of beyng4
Beyng needs humans in order to occur essentially, and humans belong
to beyng so that they might fulfill their ultimate destiny as
Da-sein.
Does beyng not become dependent on an other, if this needing constitutes
its very essence and is not a mere concomitant of that
essence?
Yet how can we speak of de-pendency [Ab-hangigkeit] here, in view
of the fact that this needing radically recreates what is needed and
forces it to its self?
Conversely, how can human beings bring beyng under their domination
if they must precisely give up their lostness in beings so as to
become ap-propriated to beyng, belonging to beyng?
This oscillation of needing and belonging constitutes beyng as event,
and our thinking is in the first place obliged to raise the movement
of this oscillation into the simplicity of knowledge and to ground it
in its truth.
Thereby, however, we must renounce the habit of striving to assure
that this essential occurrence of beyng is representable at will
for everyone at any time.
Instead, we reach the uniqueness of the oscillation in its pure selfconcealment
in each case only through the leap. Thereby we know
that what we come by here is not the "ultimate"; it is rather the essential
occurrence of stillness, that which is the most finite and most
unique as the site of the moment of the great decision regarding the
remaining absent and the advent of the gods. Only therein do we attain
the stillness of the watch for the passing by of the last god.
The uniqueness of beyng (as event), its unrepresentability (not an object),
its highest strangeness, and its essential self-concealment-these are
indications we must follow up in order at first to prepare ourselves to
surmise that which, versus the obviousness of beyng, is the most rare
and in whose openness we stand, even if our humanity does for the
most part pursue being-away.
These indications address us only if we at once withstand the plight
of the abandonment by being and confront the decision regarding the
remaining absent and the advent of the gods.
To what extent these indications bring about the basic disposition
of restraint, and to what extent restraint disposes us toward compliance
with them.
4. Cf. The leap, 166. Essential occurrence and essence.
§134 [252-253] 199
134. The relation between Da-sein and beyng
was first grasped in Being and Time as an "understanding of being,"
where "understanding" is meant in the sense of projection and that in
turn as thrown, i.e., as belonging to an ap-propriation by beyng itself.
If we now fail to recognize the strangeness and uniqueness (incomparability)
of beyng and, in unity with that, the essence of Da-sein,
then we will all-too-easily lapse into the opinion that this "relation"
corresponds to-or is even identical with-the one between subject
and object. Da-sein, however, has overcome all subjectivity, and
beyng is never an object, something we set over and against ourselves,
something representable. Only beings can be objects and not
even all beings.
What if "subjectivity" and, accordingly, the relation to the objectivity
of the object are grasped in the Kantian manner as transcendental? Beyond
that, what if the object "nature" counted as the only experienceable
being, whereby objectivity would coincide with beingness? Would
an opportunity not present itself here, and indeed a historically unique
basic position, on the basis of which the relation between Da-sein and
beyng could first be brought closer to our contemporaries by referring
to the previous view in spite of all the essential differences? To be sure. And
that is attempted in the "Kant book," although it was possible only by
doing violence to Kant in the sense of working out a more original version
of precisely the transcendental project in its unity, through an exposition
of the transcendental imagination. This interpretation of Kant is, of
course, incorrect "historiologically," but it is essential historically, i.e., as
related to the preparation for future thinking and only as so related. It
is a historical directive toward something wholly other.
Just as surely as Kant's work is "historiologically" misconceived in
such an interpretation, so there also falls into the same misconception
that which is supposed to be brought nearer as the other, viz., what is to
come: it seems we have here nothing else than an "existential" ["existenziell"]
sort of "Kantianism" or one modernized in some other way. Thus
if one maintains, rightfully, that Kant is historiologically distorted here,
then one must also forgo proposing as Kantian the basic position out of
which and into which the distortion resulted. In other words, such historiological,
comparative reckoning does not touch what is essential.
Historical confrontation (d. The interplay) is precisely a procedure that
just as much places the earlier history back into its hidden greatness and
to the same extent, but only to that extent, counterposes the other questioning-
not for the sake of comparison but in order to carry it out as
compliance to that greatness and to its necessities.
200 IV. The Leap [253-255]
And so the "Kant book" is perforce thoroughly ambiguous. Yet it
is not a contingent offering, because Kant is still the only one since
the Greeks who brings the interpretation of beingness (oucriu) into a
certain relation with "time" and thereby becomes a witness to the
hidden reign of the connection between beingness and time.
Nevertheless, for him, as already for the Greeks, thinking (A6yo<;forms
of judgment-categories-reason) remains primary in establishing
the horizon for the interpretation of beings as such. Over and
above this and as a consequence of the procedure of Descartes,
thinking as "thinking" gains mastery, and beings themselves become
on the same historical basis in each case perceptum (the represented).
That is, they become objects. Therefore, a grounding of Dasein
could not be at issue here; in other words, the question of the
truth of beyng cannot be raised in such a way.
135. The essential occurrence of beyng as event
(the relation between Da-sein and beyng)
This essential occurrence includes the ap-propriation of Da-sein. Accordingly,
to speak in the strict sense of the relation of Da -sein to beyng
is misleading, inasmuch as it implies that beyng essentially occurs "for
itself" and that Da-sein then takes up a relation to beyng.
The relation of Da-sein to beyng pertains intrinsically to the essential
occurrence of beyng itself, which could also be conveyed by
saying that beyng needs Da-sein and does not at all essentially occur
without this appropriation.
The appropriating event is so strange that it seems first to be completed
through this relation to an other, whereas its essential occurrence
without the relation is indeed radically impossible.
To speak of the relation of Da-sein makes beyng ambiguous; it
makes beyng into something over and against, which it is not-inasmuch
as it itself first appropriates precisely that which it is supposed to
be over and against. Therefore this relation is also utterly incomparable
to the subject-object relation.
136. Beyng5
Beyng-the remarkable erroneous belief is that beyng must always
"be" and that the more constantly and the longer it is, the "more
eminently" it is.
5. UberZegungen v, pp. 17f., 34, 5lf.
§136 201
But beyng "is" not at all; instead, it essentially occurs.
Then beyng, because it is the most unique, possesses the utmost
rarity, and no one esteems the few moments in which it grounds a
site for itself and occurs essentially.
Why does it happen that humans are so mistaken in their estimation
of beyng? The reason is that they must be exposed to beings in
order to experience the truth of beyng. In this exposure, beings are
the true and the open and are so because beyng essentially occurs as
self -concealmen t.
Thus humans adhere to beings, make use of beings, succumb to
the forgotten ness of beyng, and do all this under the illusion of accomplishing
what is authentic and of remaining close to beyng.
Only where beyng keeps itself back as self-concealment can beings
step forth, seem to dominate everything, and present the only
bulwark against nothingness. Yet all this is grounded in the truth of
beyng. Then the first and only consequence is to leave beyng in concealment
and indeed to forget it. Still, to leave beyng in concealment
is radically different from experiencing beyng as self-concealing. To
experience beyng, to withstand its truth, certainly does bring beings
back into their limits and takes from them their apparent uniqueness
and pre-eminence. Yet they do not thereby come to be any less; on
the contrary, they become beings in the more proper sense, i.e., they
occur more essentially in the essential occurrence of beyng.
How very many (all) now talk of "being" and mean only beings
and perhaps only those beings that provide an opportunity for evasion
and reassurance.
To speak of the relation of the human being to beyng and, conversely,
of the relation of beyng to the human being makes it seem as
if beyng essentially occurred, with regard to the human being, as
something over and against, as an object.
But the human being as Da-sein is ap-propriated by beyng as the
event and thus belongs to the event itself.
Beyng "is" neither round about humans nor does it merely vibrate
right through them as through beings. Instead, being appropriates
Dasein and only thus essentially occurs as event.
By no means, however, may the event be represented as an "incident"
or a "novelty." Its truth, i.e., the truth itself, essentially occurs
only if sheltered in art, thinking, poetry, deed. It therefore requires the
steadfastness of the Da-sein that repudiates all the semblant immediacy
of mere representation.
Beyng essentially occurs as the event. That is the ground and abyss
of the god's availing of the human being or, conversely, of the availability
of the human being for god. But this availability is withstood
only in Da-sein.
202 IV. The Leap [256-257J
(If beyng can never be determined as the "most general," the
"emptiest," and the "most abstract," since it is inaccessible to any
representation, then it also, and indeed for the same reason, cannot
be grasped as the "most concrete" and even less as the combination
of these two interpretations, each of which is insufficient in itself.)
The reciprocal availability is disposed in Dasein in the basic disposition
of restraint, and what is disposing is the event. Yet if we interpret
disposition in terms of our notion of "feeling," then it will readily be
said that being is now placed in relation to "feeling" instead of "thinking."
But how impulsive and superficial is our understanding of "feelings"
as "faculties" and "phenomena" of a "soul." How far are we standing
from the essence of disposition, i.e., how far from Da-sein.
If it is still allowed, for the sake of a preliminary orientation, to
characterize beyng on the basis of "beings," then we will call upon
the actual as what genuinely is. We know the actual as the present,
the constant.
In the other beginning, however, beings are never the actual in
this sense of "presence." Such presence, even where it is encountered
as constancy, is for the originary projection of the truth of beyng the
most ephemeral.
What is actual, i.e., what is, is first that which is remembered and
that which is still the prepared. Memory and preparedness open the
temporal-spatial playing field of beyng in which thinking must renounce
the "presence" that previously was the one and only determination.
(Because it is here that the most proximate domain lies
for the decision regarding the truth of beyng, the initiation of the
leap to the other beginning had to be attempted as "Being and Time.")
Yet one might want to retain the ordinary conception of time (predominant
since Aristotle-Plato), leave the vuv ["now"] its privilege,
and derive the past and future as modifications of the vuv, especially
because memory can remember only out of and in calling upon
something present and something that has been present and because
what is in the future has but one destiny, namely, to become
something present.
Although what is present is never the negative and participates in
the grounding of memory and preparedness, yet all this is so only if
the presencing of what in each case is present has already been borne
and pervasively disposed by memory and preparedness. Only from
the intimacy of these can the present gleam forth. In original experience,
the present cannot be reckoned according to its ephemeralness
but only according to its uniqueness. This latter is the new and essential
content of the constancy and presencing that are to be determined
on the basis of memory and preparedness.
§137 [258-259] 203
137. Beyng
In the other beginning, the essential occurrence of beyng itself must
be apprehended as the inceptual and in its full strangeness with respect
to beings. Beings themselves are then no longer what is familiar,
from which beyng could be delineated as their mere vaporous
residue, as if beyng were simply the not yet grasped and most general
determination of otherwise known beings.
In the other beginning, there is carried out the extreme transporting
from "beings" as supposedly setting the standard, no matter how
much (d. the abandonment by being) they might still dominate all
thinking.
Beyng is here not a supervenient genus, not an added cause, not
something that encompasses beings by standing behind and over
them. If that were the case, beyng would be degraded to the level of
an addendum, whose accessory character would not be undone by
any elevation to "transcendence."
Beyng or, rather, its essential occurrence-out of which and back
into which beings as beings first come to be in a concealed and sheltered
way (d. The grounding, on truth).
The question of the difference between being and beings has here
a character that is totally unlike anything in the domain of the guiding
question (the domain of ontology). The concept of the "ontological
difference" merely preparatory, transitional from the guiding
question to the basic question.
The truth of beyng, in which and as which the essential occurrence
of beyng conceals itself in opening itself, is the event. That is at
the same time the essential occurrence of truth as such. In the turning
of the event, the essential occurrence of truth is likewise the
truth of the essential occurrence. This reciprocity itself belongs to
beyng as such.
The question of why there is at all truth as clearing-concealing
presupposes the truth of the "why." But both, truth and the "why"
(the call for a grounding), are the same.
The essential occurrence is the truth itself, which belongs to beyng
and arises from beyng.
Only where, as in the first beginning, the essential occurrence appears
merely as presencing, does there occur an immediate separation between
beings and their "essence," and that is precisely the essential occurrence
of beyng as presence. There by necessity the question of beyng
as such, i.e., the question of its truth, cannot be experienced and asked.
204 IV. The Leap [259-260]
138. The truth of beyng and the understanding of being
Preliminary remark: if, without first heeding what was said in Being
and Time about the understanding of being, understanding is taken
as a kind of determining recognition of the inner "lived experiences"
of a "subject" and the one who understands is accordingly taken as
an I -subject, then a grasp of what is meant by the understanding of
being is doomed to failure. The unavoidable result will be the coarsest
misinterpretations, such as the view that the understanding of
being makes beyng (beings are actually what is meant) "dependent"
on the subject and that everything amounts to an "idealism" (the
concept of which, moreover. remains obscure).
To oppose this view, we need to refer to the basic determination of
understanding as projection. That means understanding is an opening up
and is a projecting of oneself, and a placing of oneself, out into the open
realm where in understanding one first comes to oneself as a self.
Furthermore, understanding as projection is a thrown projection,
a coming into the open realm (truth) which already finds itself in the
midst of opened beings, rooted in the earth and protruding up into a
world. Accordingly, the understanding of being as grounding of the
truth of being is the opposite of "subjectivation," since it is the overcoming
of all subjectivity and of the modes of thought determined
on that basis.
In understanding as thrown projection there lies necessarily the
turning, in accord with the origin of Dasein; the projector of the projection
is a thrown projector-but only in the throwing and through it.
Understanding is the carrying out and taking over of the withstanding
steadfastness; it is Da-sein, and taking over is the undergoing
wherein what is self-secluding opens itself as maintaining and
binding.
139. The essential occurrence of beyng:
Truth and time-space6
Beyng essentially occurs; beings are.
Beyng essentially occurs as the event. Belonging to this are the uniqueness
and strangeness in the momentariness of the site whose unforeseen
incursion is its first broadening out.
6. Cf. The leap and The grounding.
§140 [260-261] 205
The form in which the incursion of beyng is initially posed and
preserved is the predelineation of the domain for the sheltering of
the truth of the approaching and absconding god.
The possible domain for the eruption of the truth of beyng is decided
in part by the extent to which what has long been ungrounded, yet persists
and is common, can be brought into a readiness for an incursion.
Beyng essentially occurs as the event. That is not a proposition; it is the
nonconceptual reticence of the essence which opens itself only to the
full historical carrying out of inceptual thinking. Beings first arise historically
out of the truth of beyng, and that truth is sheltered in the
steadfastness of Da-sein. Hence "being," as applicable as the term may
be to everything, is never the common. Yet being essentially occurs,
where and when it does, more closely and more intimately than any
beings. Here, out of Da-sein, the complete otherness of the relation to
beyng is thought and carried out, and7 that happens in the time-space
arising out of the transporting and captivating of truth itself. Timespace
itself is a conflictual domain of strife. Out of this domain, from
the immediate assault on beings as such (qnJOli:;, i15Ea, ouota), only presence
was retained in the first beginning as graspable and paradigmatic
for all interpretation of beings. Time thereby as the present, and
space-Le., place-as here and there within presence and belonging to
it. In truth, however, space has no presence, just as it has no absence.
Spacing (which is temporalizing)-temporalizing (which is spatializing)
(d. the conflict of the strife) as the most proximate configuring
domain for the truth of beyng, but not a relapse to the common,
formal concepts of space and time (!); instead, resumption into
the strife, world and earth-event.
140. The essential occurrence of beyng
If being (beingness) is not explained through the expedient of positing
a first cause of all beings, a cause which causes itself, if beings as such
are not dissolved into objectivity and beingness in turn is not explained
through the representation of objects and through their apriori, and if
beyng itself is to come to occur essentially and yet all kinds of beings in
themselves are to be kept aloof from it, then the necessary presupposition
is a meditation which endures the abandonment by being as a
plight. To this meditation the following will be clear:
The truth of being (and thus being itself) essentially occurs only
where and when Da-sein occurs.
7. See the afterword, p. 406.-Ed.
206 IV. The Leap [261-262]
Da-sein "is" only where and when the being of truth occurs.
A turning-indeed the turning-which indicates precisely the essence
of being itself as the event that oscillates in itself.
In itself the event grounds Da-sein (I.).
Da-sein grounds the event (II.).
Here grounding is reciprocally turning: I. bearing-protruding, II.
instituting-projecting (d. The leap, 144. Beyng and the original strife,
p.208f.).
141. The essence ofbeyng8
The ap-propriation of Da-sein by beyng and the grounding of the
truth of being in Da-sein-the turning in the event is not contained
exclusively either in the call (the remaining absent) or in the belonging
(abandonment by being); nor does it reside in both together. For
these two themselves, and both together, are first attained in the
oscillation of the event. Within the event, the event itself oscillates in
the oscillation.
The trembling of this coming to be of the oscillation in the turning
of the event is the most concealed essence of beyng. This concealment
is cleared as concealment only in the deepest clearing of the
site of the moment. In order to occur essentially in this seldomness
and uniqueness, beyng "needs" Da-sein, and Da-sein grounds being
human, is its ground, insofar as the human being in withstanding
Da-sein grounds Da-sein through steadfastness.
142. The essence ofbeyng
The trembling of the coming to be of the oscillation in the turning,
the appropriation of the belonging, grounding, sheltering Dasein to
the intimation-this essential occurrence of beyng is not itself the
last god; instead, the essential occurrence of being grounds the sheltering,
and thereby the creative preservation, of the god, who pervades
beyng with divinity always only in work and sacrifice, deed and
thought.
Hence thinking, as inaugural of the other beginning, also may
come into the remote nearness of the last god.
It does so through and in its self-grounding history but never in the
form of a result, i.e., in the form of a productive mode of representation
8. Cf. The grounding, The essence of truth.
§ 143 [262-264] 207
which brings the god to shelter. All such claims, apparently the highest,
are low and constitute a disparagement of beyng! (Cf. The grounding,
230. Truth and correctness.)
The appropriating event and its joining in the abyss of time-space
form the net in which the last god is self-suspended in order to rend
the net and let it end in its uniqueness, divine and rare and the
strangest amid all beings.
The sudden extinguishing of the great fire-this leaves behind
something which is neither day nor night, which no one grasps, and
in which humans, having come to the end, still bustle about so as to
benumb themselves with the products of their machinations, pretending
such products are made for all eternity, perhaps for that "and so
forth" which is neither day nor night.
143. Beyng
as appropriating event. The ap-propriation destines the human being
to be the property of beyng.
Then is beyng in fact the other, something over and against the
event? No; for property is belongingness to the ap-propriation, and
the latter itself constitutes beyng.
To be sure, the event must never be represented immediately and
objectively. The appropriation is the oscillation between humans and
gods and is precisely this "between" itself and its essential occurrence
which is grounded through and in Da-sein.
The god is neither a "being" nor a "nonbeing" and is also not to be
identified with beyng. Instead, beyng essentially occurs in the manner
of time-space as that "between" which can never be grounded in the
god and also not in the human being (as some objectively present,
living thing) but only in Da-sein.
Beyng and the essential occurrence of its truth are of humans, insofar
as the human being becomes steadfast as Da-sein. That is as
much as to say: beyng does not essentially occur by the grace of humans,
by the mere fact that humans occur.
Beyng "is" of humans in such a way that beyng itself needs the
human being as the preserver of the site of the moment for the absconding
and advent of the gods.
It is futile to try to set beyng off in relief against just any random being,
especially since "just any being," if experienced only as something true,
is already in each case the other of itself but is not just any other as the opposite
belonging intrinsically to it. The other refers instead to that which,
as a sheltering of the truth of being, lets beings be beings.
208 IV. The Leap [264-265]
144. Beyng and the original strife9
(beyng or non-beyng in the essence of beyng itself)
The origin of strife from the intimacy of the "not" in beyng! The event.
The intimacy of the "not" in beyng: belonging first of all to the essential
occurrence of beyng. Why? Can we still question in this way?
If not, why not?
The intimacy of the "not" and also what is in strife in being-are
these not what Hegel means by "negativity"? No; and yet he did experience
something essential, as already did Plato in his Sophist and
before him (more essentially and quite differently) Heraclitus. But
Hegel sublates it in absolute knowledge; negativity there only to disappear
and to keep the movement of sublation in play.
Precisely not the essential occurrence. Why not? Because being as
beingness (actuality) on the basis of thinking (absolute knowledge).
What matters is not-and indeed not first and only-that there "is"
also a counter-part to every part and both belong together but, rather,
that if indeed the "counter" as oscillation [das Gegen as Gegenschwung],
then as event. Previously, there was always only sublation and gatheredness
(A6yo<;), but now freeing and abyss and the full essential occurrence
of original truth in time-space.
Now not vOElv, but the sheltering steadfastness. Strife as the essential
occurrence of the "between," not as giving validity also to what is
adverse.
The aphorism of Heraclitus on rroAEllo<; contains one of the greatest
insights of Western philosophy, and yet it could not be developed for
the question of truth, just as little as it could for the question of being
(w. s. 1933-3410 ).
But whence the intimacy of the "not" in beyng? Whence such essential
occurrence of beyng? Ever and again, questioning comes up
against this issue, the one regarding the ground of the truth of beyng.
But truth itself the ground? And truth? It arises from holding oneself
in the truth! Yet how is this an origin? To hold oneself in the
truth: our burgeoning and our willing from our plight, because we
are entrusted to ourselves and delivered up to ourselves-ourselves?
Who are we ourselves?
9. Cf. Being and notbeing-the decision.
10. Lecture course, "Vom Wesen der Wahrheit," winter semester, 1933-34
(GA36-7).
§145 [265-266] 209
Therefore in fact not what is ours; rather, the fact that we endure the
self as it is opening up, and in the self (d. The grounding) the to-itself
and thereby beyng as event open themselves in a concealed way.
Accordingly, not "we" the starting point, but "we": as exposed and
dislodged, though in forgetfulness of this dislodging.
If in this way the event shines into selfhood, then residing therein
is the direction toward intimacy.
The more originally we are ourselves, then all the further are we
already set out into the essential occurrence of beyng, and reciprocally
(d. the essential occurrence of beyng-the reciprocal grounding
of being and Da-sein).
The "ground" of intimacy is open only if the bedrock of questioning
is assumed here. This bedrock what is decisive. Beyng nothing
"human" in the sense of a human dominion, and yet the essential
occurrence of beyng needs Da-sein and hence also needs the steadfastness
of the human being.
145. Beyng and nothingness
In the entire history of metaphysics, i.e., in all previous thought,
"being" is always grasped as the beingness of beings and hence as these
beings themselves. Today still, for every "thinker" the identification of
being with beings is something that precedes, so to speak, and the reason
is indeed an incapacity for drawing distinctions on the part of all
philosophy.
Accordingly, nothingness is always grasped as a nonbeing and thus
as negativum. If "nothingness" in this sense is even posited as a goal,
then "pessimistic nihilism" is consummated, the disdain for every effete
"philosophy of nothingness" is legitimated, and, above all, one is
exempted from any questioning, while the "heroic thinkers" are distinguished
precisely by their promoting of this exemption.
There is not the least in common between all this and my questioning
of nothingness, which arises out of the question of the truth
of beyng. Nothingness is neither negative nor a "goal." Instead, it is
the essential trembling of beyng itself and therefore is more than any
being.
The fact that the proposition from Hegel's Logik, "Being and nothingness
are the same," is quoted in "What is Metaphysics?" [Was ist
Metaphysik?] signifies-and can signify only this-a general agreement
with regard to bringing together being and nothingness. For
Hegel, however, "beyng" is not only a determinate, first stage of what
is to be thought in the future as beyng, but this first stage, as the
210 IV. The Leap [266-268]
un-determined and un-mediated, is already precisely the pure negativity
of objectivity and of thinking (beingness and thinking).
As difficult as it will be for the future to extricate itself from "metaphysical"
thinking, just as inaccessible to it will at first be "nothingness,"
which is higher than everything "positive" and "negative" in
the totality of beings.
Thoughtful questioning must first have attained an original power
to say "yes," which resides essentially beyond all optimistic bravado
and all programmatic heroism, in order to be strong enough to experience
as the most concealed gift the nihilating in beyng itself, which
alone genuinely un-settles us into beyng and into its truth. Then we
will indeed recognize that nothingness can never be reckoned, or
balanced, against beyng, e.g., as what is to be shunned or denied,
because beyng (Le., nothingness) is the "between" for beings and for
divinization and can never become a "goal."
146. Beyng and non-beyngll
Because the "not" belongs to the essence of beyng (ripeness as the
turning in the event; d. The last god), beyng likewise belongs to the
"not." In other words, what has genuinely the quality of the "not'" is
the negative and is in no way whatever mere "nothingness" as the
latter is grasped through the representational denial of something,
on the basis of which denial one then says: nothingness "is" not. But
nonbeyng essentially occurs, and beyng essentially occurs; nonbeing
essentially occurs in the distorted essence, beyng essentially occurs as permeated
with negativity.
Only because beyng essentially occurs in this manner does it have
nonbeing as its other, for this other is the other of itself.
Insofar as beyng essentially occurs as permeated with negativity, it at the
same time makes possible and compels otherness.
Whence the extreme restriction here to the one and to the other
and thus the either-or?
Out of the uniqueness of beyng there follows the uniqueness of its
appertaining "not" and thus the uniqueness of the other.
The one and the other compel for themselves the either-or as first.
But this apparently most general and emptiest distinction has to be
recognized as one that is such only for the interpretation of beingness
as iOEa (being and thinking!): something (arbitrarily and in general)
11. Cf. The leap, 144. Beyng and the original strife; d. Prospect, 47. The essence of
decision.
§148 [268-269] 211
and the not-something (nothingness); the "not" likewise representationally
groundless and empty.
Yet this apparently most general and emptiest distinction is the
most unique and most fulfilled decision. Consequently a presupposition
for it can never be, without self-delusion, an indeterminate representation
of "beyng," if indeed there is such a representation; instead,
beyng as event.
The event as the hesitant self-withholding and therein the ripeness of
"time," the mightiness of the fruit, and the greatness of the bestowing,
but in the truth as clearing for self-concealing.
The ripeness is gravid with the original "not," ripening not yet a
bestowing, no longer both in the oscillation. All this itself withheld in
the hesitation, and thus the captivating in the transporting. Here first
the essential occurrence of the negative in beyng as event.
147. The essential occurrence of beyng
(the finitude of beyng)
What does it mean that being "is" in-finite [un-endlich]? The question
cannot at all be answered, unless included in it is also the question
of the essence of beyng.
And the same applies to the proposition that being is finite, if infinity
and finitude are taken as concepts relating to objectively present
magnitudes. Or is a quality intended thereby? Which one?
Ultimately, the question of the essential occurrence of beyng
stands outside of the conflict between those propositions. The proposition
that beyng is finite is only intended to avert provisionally every
sort of "idealism."
The conflict of those propositions would require saying that if
beyng is posited as infinite, then it is in fact determinate. And if posited
as finite, then its abyssal character is affirmed. For in-finity can
certainly not be meant in the sense of endless flowing and straying
but, instead, as a closed circle! On the other hand, the event stands in
its "turning"! (conflictually).
148. Beings are
That "proposition" does not immediately say anything. For it simply
repeats what is already expressed by the word "beings." The proposition
says nothing, as long as it is understood immediately (to the extent that
that is even possible), i.e., as long as it is thought in a thought-less way.
212 IV. The Leap [269-270]
But let the proposition be transposed into the domain of truth:
being essentially occurs. Then it says: beings belong within the essential
occurrence of beyng. Now the proposition has passed from thoughtless
self-evidence to question-worthiness.
Thus the proposition turns out not to be the last thing that can be
said; instead, it is the most preliminary thing that can be questioned.
What does it mean for beings to "belong within the essential occurrence
of being"? Another question immediately arises: which beings?
What are beings for us? That which is over and against us? That
which has been put away, which we let stand there as objects? If
beings "are" in virtue of encountering them, then why this encounter?
When this encounter and how? For a representing?
Or are "beings" the outflow of the essential occurrence of beyng?
Or is it rather the case here, as long as "beings" are in this way
taken into representation in general, that nothing can be said about
them, since beings, as they "are" in each case out of a sheltering and
in the manner of a sheltering, belong to beyng? Especially since
beyng is historical and, at a moment, the event itself?
Do we not ever and again remain too deeply mired in the welltrodden
tracks of representation, especially with our penchant for
beings as a whole and in general, so that we still see very little (and
even that very poorly) of what the uniqueness of beyng, once grasped,
means for the question of being?
149. The beingness of beings distinguished according to
Tl Eanv and on Eanv
This distinction, within the first beginning and thus coming to the
fore in the history of the guiding question, must be connected to the
interpretation of beings as such which presides there.
We call, to some extent arbitrarily, the Ti Eanv the quiddity (whatness,
essential and the on Eanv the "mode" (the fact that something is,
and how it is, existential. More important than the terms is the matter
at issue itself and thus also the question of how this distinction arises
out of the beingness of beings and accordingly belongs to the essential
occurrence of beyng.
The immediate representation of this distinction and the elements
distinguished leads to a dead end-the one of something that has
been conventional to us for so long. "The door" has its whatness, and
so do "the clock" and "the bird"; likewise, each of these has the fact
that it is and how it is.
§149 [270-271] 213
Does the on £crT"lV include only "actuality" or also possibility and
necessity? Are the latter "modalities" modalities of actuality? If actuality
itself is but one modality among others, then of what are these
the modalities?
Does it suffice, preliminarily in the sense and horizon of the guiding
question, to refer to distinctions in presence and absence, for example
with respect to the present at hand and the ready to hand?
In any case, the immediate "thinking" of this distinction, as long
as we continue to take such thinking as first and ultimate, does not
exhibit anything that would determine the distinction as the proper
horizon and the truth.
A merely formal (in the sense of taking the distinction as simply
given and fallen from heaven) and dialectical consideration of the relation
between essentia and existentia remains empty scholasticism and
will be distinguished precisely by its remaining without a horizon and
without a meditation on truth relative to the concepts of beingness in
the broad sense. The expedient is then an attempt to explain "being"
on the basis of the highest being as something produced and thought
by this being.
Yet the historical fact remains: the development of the guiding
question soon struck up against this distinction in beingness itself.
Indeed very soon! At what point? When beings were interpreted as
oucrta-Le., interpreted in the light of the iOea. Why then and there?
(Cf. The interplay, 110. The iOea, Platonism, and idealism.) In a formal
sense, it can be said that every "quiddity" has its modality and every
modality is that of a quiddity. Thus both belong together. And hence
the indication of a hidden, quite richer essence of beingness.
But essentia and existentia are not what is richer and are not the
consequence of something simple. It is just the opposite: they are a
certain impoverishment of an (in itself already richer) essence of
beyng and of its truth (the temporality-spatiality of this truth as
abyss).
The next step that must be taken in this confrontation is to manifest
the thinking of oucrta as a representing (VOElv) in its horizon and on
its ground and to bring to light the character of oucrta as constant
presence. Today it is supposed that that character has always been
known. That is correct and yet incorrect: correct, insofar as constancy
and presence are implicitly meant and meant in advance, and
yet incorrect insofar as these are not, precisely as such, brought to
knowledge, grasped as "temporal" characteristics of a more originary
time (of time-space), and-which is still more essential-questioned
first from there.
214 IV. The Leap [272-·273]
150. The origin of the distinction between
what a being is and the fact that it isl2
Beings are thereby already determined in their beingness and specifically
as iSEa, the look, which is itself determined as constant presence.
To what extent does the iSEa include both temporal and spatial
determinations?
Presence (t) as gatheredness of what shines forth, of the look-what.
Constancy (t) as persistence and duration-that the look does not
disappear.
Constancy (s) whatfills up, what constitutes the constant being.
Presence (s) giving space, the whither of the replacement that the
being stands firm.
Each of the two determinations, presence and constancy, at once
temporal and spatial and each respectively understood in the sense
of temporalization and spatialization-the particular distinction we
take all too conventionally and without question as that between the
"what" and the "that" of a being.
Whence this doubling in temporalization and spatialization? From
their fundamental essence as transporting and captivating, and this
rooted in the essence of truth (d. The grounding, 242. Time-space as
abyss).
If the "what" and the "that" as determinations of beingness, as well as
this latter, are not questioned with respect to their truth (time-space),
then all discussions of essentia and existentia remain, as happened in the
Middle Ages, an empty wrangling over uprooted concepts.
But beingness is already founded on the hidden and insurmountable
"differentiation" between beyng and beings.
151. Being and beings13
This differentiation first from the guiding question of beingness and
bemired there (d. The interplay, 110. The iSEa, Platonism, and idealism).
Yet also in the other beginning, this differentiation possesses its truth,
indeed only now acquires its truth. For, now, when beingness is no
longer questioned from the standpoint of "thinking" (not beingness
12. Cf. The interplay, 98. The projection of beingness upon constant presence, and
llO. The iliEcx, Platonism, and idealism; d. lecture course, Die Grundprobleme der
Phiinomenologie, summer semester 1927 (GA24).
13. Cf. The leap, 152. The levels of beyng.
§152 [273-274] 215
and thinking, but "being and time" understood transitionally), there
the "differentiation" names that domain of the event of the originating
essential occurrence of being in the truth, i.e., in the sheltering of
truth, whereby beings as such first enter into the "there" (d. The
grounding, 227. On the essence of truth, p. 279).
The "there" is the occurring, ap-propriated, and steadfast site of the
moment of the turning for the clearing of beings in the appropriation.
The differentiation no longer contains anything of what is without
foundation and of what is meant and needed only in the logicalcategorial-
transcendental sense. The mere representation of being
and beings in their differentiation is now vacuous and misleading
insofar as it holds fast to mere representation.
What is opened up for thought in this representation can be conceived
only by comprehending the entire conjuncture of the projection
of Da-sein.
152. The levels ofbeyng14
Whence this ordering into levels? Already on the basis of the iota
and the nearness to it-cf., for example, Plato's Republic, although
there the levels are levels of "beings" or, more specifically, levels proceeding
from nonbeings to beings all the way up to av-rw<; av.
Then especially the neo-Platonic order of levels!
Christian theology-ens creatum and analogia en tis.
Wherever a summum ens is posited. Leibniz: slumbering monads f-t
central monad. Everything in a revised neo-Platonic form of a system
in German Idealism. To what extent this all goes back to Plato and is
Platonism; always only levels of beings as varying fulfillments of the
highest beingness.
Are there at all levels of this sort and even levels ofbeyng, if the question is
posed proceeding from the truth of being as event?
If we consider the differentiation between beyng and beings as an
appropriation of Da-sein and a sheltering of beings, and if we note that
everything here is thoroughly historical and that a Platonic-idealistic
system has become impossible on account of its insufficiency, then
there remains the question of how to place in order what is living,
"nature" and what is non-living in it, tool, machination, work, deed,
sacrifice, and their power of truth (primordiality of the sheltering of
truth and thereby the originating essential occurrence of the event).
Every representational and calculative order is superficial here;
14. Cf. The leap, l32. Beyng and beings, and 154. "Life."
216 IV. The Leap [274-275]
essential is only the historical necessity in the history of the truth of
beyng whose era is dawning.
How do matters stand with "machination" (technology), and how
are all shelterings gathered together in it, or, first and foremost, how
is the reaching out of the abandonment by being entrenched in it?
What is essential is the historical grounding power of sheltering (a
power which grounds Dasein), as is also the decidedness toward this
sheltering and toward its scope for the enduring of the event.
In accord with the types of "ontologies" proper to the different
"realms" (nature, history), does there not yet remain at least a provisional
way of creating a horizon for the projection according to being,
whereby those realms might be experienceable in a new manner?
Something like that could become necessary as transition; but it is still
precarious inasmuch as it will be very tempting to slip from there
into a systematics of the earlier style.
Yet if the "ordering" is a joining and is subject to the formation of
history and to the enduring of its mystery, then this joining itself can,
indeed must, possess a realm and a way; not just any arbitrary way of
sheltering (such as technology) can be subjected to meditation.
It must be recalled here that sheltering is always the playing out of
the strife between world and earth, that these pass under each other
while surmounting each other, and that the sheltering of truth plays
out first and foremost in their countercurrent.
World is "earthly" (earthy), earth is worldly. Earth, because it is
related to history, is in one respect more originary than nature. World
is higher than merely "created" things, because it is formative ofhistory
and so lies closest to the event.
Then does beyng indeed possess levels? Properly speaking, no; but
neither do beings. Then what is the source and the sense of the manifold
of shelterings? That cannot be explained and cannot be derived by
reckoning up a plan of Providence. Yet what matters just as little is
mere acceptance in representation. Instead, the issue is the decision in
the historical necessities out of the respective era of the history of
being.
What is technology supposed to be? How does technology stand,
not in the sense of an ideal, but with regard to the necessity of overcoming
the abandonment by being or of radically placing it up for
decision? Is technology the historical path to the ending, to the reversion
of the last human hL,ng into the technicized animal, the one that thereby
loses even the original animality of the inserted animal? If technology is
taken up beforehand as a sheltering, can it be inserted into the grounding of
Da-sein?
§154 217
And so the decision with regard to every sort of sheltering is momentarily
reserved for us; in other words, what is reserved is that
which we pass by in our passing away.
153. Life
Since every living thing is organismic, i.e., bodily, it is possible to take
this bodily thing as a body-object and then consider it mechanistically.
There even are certain tasks which require such a view, such as
the measurement of size and weight (to be sure, such measurement
immediately stands within the horizon of an interpretation of living
beings).
The question remains as to whether what can be done in such a
(mechanistic) way ever leads to what, first and foremost, must be
done, assuming that a fundamental relation to living beings is necessary.
To what extent is that the case? What are plants and animals to
us, apart from their use for our sustenance and adornment?
Are living beings what is effortless? Something like that would be
most difficult to see if everything is directed toward effort and toward
its overcoming and if everything moves within machination!
Can there be "biology" as long as the fundamental relation to living
beings is unclear, as long as the living being has not become the
other resonance of Da-sein?
But must there be "biology," since it derives its justification and its
necessity from the sovereignty of science within modern machination?
Will not every biology necessarily destroy "living beings" and
thwart a fundamental relation to them? Must this relation not be
sought completely outside of "science"? In what space should this relation
abide?
"Living beings," like everything that can be objectified, will offer
scientific progress endless possibilities and yet will also withdraw
more and more, the more groundless becomes science itself at the
same time.
154. "Life"15
a "mode" of the beingness (beyng) of beings. The initial opening of a
being toward itself in the preservation of the self. The first darkening in
15. Cf. The leap, 152. The levels ofbeyng; d. bio!ogism in The interplay, 110. The
U\£a, Platonism, and idealism, p. 173f.
218 IV. The Leap [277-278]
the preservation of the self grounds the absorption of the living being,
and in this absorption all stimulation and stimulatability are carried
out, and so are the various levels of darkening and of its development.
The darkening and the essence of instinct. The preservation of the self
and the priority of the "species"; this does not know any "individual" as
egotistical.
The darkening and worldlessness. (Earlier as world-poor! Liable to be
misunderstood. The stone not even worldless, because even without
darkening.)
Rigidifying and reversion of life out of the initial opening. Accordingly,
also no seclusion, unless the living being is included-"earth"
(stone, plant, animal). Stone and river not without plant, animal.
How does the decision regarding "life" stand and fall? Meditation on
"the biological."
155. Nature and earth
Nature, separated out from beings by the natural sciences-what happens
to it through technology? What happens is the destruction of
"nature," a destruction that is ever increasing or, rather, is simply rolling
on to its end. What was nature once? It was the site of the moment
of the advent and sojourning of the gods; and that was when nature,
still <pUO'l<;, rested in the essential occurrence of beyng itself.
Subsequently, nature soon became a being and then even the
counterpart of "grace" and, after this degradation, was completely set
out in the compulsion of calculative machination and economics.
Ultimately what remained were "scenic views" and recreational
opportunities, and now even these have been calculated to gigantic
proportions and prepared for the masses. And then? Is that the end?
Why is the earth silent at this destruction? Because the earth is not
allowed the strife with a world, not allowed the truth of beyng. Why
not? Is it because that gigantic thing, the human being, becomes all
the smaller the more gigantically grown?
Does nature have to be renounced and abandoned to machination?
Can we yet seek the earth anew? Who will kindle that strife in which
the earth finds its open realm, secludes itself, and is genuinely the earth?
156. The fissure
cannot be known in its structure unless we experience the abyss (d.
truth) as belonging to the event.
§157 219
The essential occurrence of beyng will remain closed to philosophy,
as long as philosophy maintains that being could be known and,
so to speak, assembled together by working out the various modal
concepts. Apart from the problematic origin of the modalities, one
thing is decisive here: the leap into beyng as event. Only thence does
the fissure open up. Yet it is precisely this leap that requires the longest
preparation, one which includes complete detachment from being
as beingness and as the "most general" determination.
Will a better-equipped thinker venture the leap one day? Such a
thinker must have forgotten, in a creative sense, the previous way of
asking about being, i.e., about beingness. This forgetting is not the
losing of something that is still to be possessed; it is the transformation
into a more original stance of questioning.
Then someone must be equipped for the inexhaustibility of the
simple, so that the simple no longer withdraws by being misinterpreted
as the empty. The simple, in which all essential occurrence
has gathered, must be found again in every being. No; it is the latter
which must be found in the former. But we attain the former only by
preserving the latter-i.e., each thing-in the playing field of its
mystery and do not pretend that we can seize beyng by dissecting
our already established cognitions of the properties of the thing.
This dissecting and the establishment of one experience as the experience
were necessary once, so that Kant could first of all indicate
what "transcendental" knowledge is supposed to grasp. Even for this
indication to occur, along with its elaboration in Kant's work, there
had to be accomplished centuries of preparation.
What are we then supposed to expect from our first gropings, if
the matter at issue is completely different, for which Kant can be no
more than a distant prelude and can even be that only if this prelude
is already grasped in terms of our more originary task?
What is the significance of the fact that Kant treats the "modalities"
at the end of the analytic of principles, thus retroactively determining
everything that preceded?
157. The fissure and the "modalities"
The "modalities" pertain to beings (to beingness) and say nothing at
all about the fissure of beyng itself. This fissure can come into question
only if the truth of beyng as event lights up, specifically as that
of which the god has need in such a way that the human being belongs
intrinsically to the event (d. The last god, 256. The last god). The
modalities thereby fall short of the fissure, just as beingness falls
220 IV. The Leap [279-281J
short of the truth of beyng. Furthermore, the question of the modalities
is necessarily bound within the framework of the guiding question,
whereas an inquiry into the fissure is a matter of the basic question
alone.
In one direction, the fissure has its first and widest span in the
god's needfulness and, in the other direction, in the belonging of the
human being (to beyng). Occurring essentially here are the plummetings
of the god and the ascent of the human being as the one
grounded in Da-sein. The fissure is the inner, incalculable splitting
open of the ap-propriation, i.e., the splitting open of the essential occurrence
of beyng as the center that is needed, that bestows belongingness,
and that remains related to the passing by of the god and, at
the same time, to the history of mankind.
The appropriating event consigns god to the human being, even
while it assigns the human being to god (d. Prospect, 7. Of the event,
p.23).
Da-sein, and thereby the human being, if able to leap in creative
grounding, is grounded abyssally in the event.
Eventuating here are refusal and remaining absent, incursion and
accident, restraint and transfiguration, freedom and compulsion.
Such things eventuate, i.e., belong to the essential occurrence of the
event itself. Every way of ordering, rearranging, and intermixing
"categories" fails here, because the categories are said on the basis of
beings and apply to beings and never name or know beyng itself.
Likewise, passing by, event, and history can never be thought as
types of "motion," because motion (even understood as IlETa~oA~) is
always related to ov as ouota. In this relation also belong 8Uvalll<;,
£v£PY£la, and the later concepts descended from them.
Above all, however, that which constitutes the inner splitting
open of the event and, according to the respective appropriation, either
remains veiled or steps forth, can never be counted up and presented
in a "table" or in any other pigeonholes of a system. Instead,
every saying of the fissure is a thoughtful word to god and at the
human being and thereby into Da-sein and so into the strife of world
and earth.
Here we have no investigating dissection of "structures," but even
less a stammering in mere "signs" which pretends as if something
were really addressed.
The resort to "ciphers" is merely the last consequence of "ontology"
and "logic," which have not been overcome but are precisely
presupposed.
The utterances of inceptual thinking stand outside the distinction
between concept and cipher.
§159 [281-282] 221
158. The fissure and the "modalities"16
The origin and dominance of the "modalities" are even more questionworthy
than the interpretation of beings in terms of ioea, specifically
in the way this interpretation has entrenched itself in the course of
the history of philosophy and has become, so to speak, a "stockpile of
problems," ones objectively present in themselves.
For this provenance, what is important is the priority of "actuality"
(d. also existentia as what preeminently stands in distinction to
essential: actuality as EvepYEla, with possibility and necessity as-so
to speak-its two horns.
Yet EvepYEla is genuinely grasped out of the undeveloped CPU01C;
that is analyzed as beingness in the light of llEm~oA~. Why llE·ra~oA~?
Because, for the anticipatory retention of constancy and presence,
llETa~oA~ (preeminently as cpopa) is the counter-appearance as such
and thereby is that which allows, out of itself interpreted as an other,
a coming back to ouota. Here lies the core of Aristotle's "ontology."
159. The fissure
One essential fissure is being in its bending back (a capacity, but not as
possibility, which has always been thought hitherto in terms of beings
as objectively present).
To split open this fissure and thus unitarily gaping open as mastery,
protruding origin. Mastery is-or, to put it better, essentially
occurs as-bequest; it is not bequeathed itself, but bequeaths the
constant originariness. Wherever beings are transformed out o!beyng,
i.e., are supposed to be grounded, mastery is necessary.
Mastery is the necessity of what is free toward what is free. Mastery
is exercised, and essentially occurs, as the unconditionality in the domain
of freedom, and its greatness consists in the fact that it needs no
power and thus no violence. Yet it remains more effective than these,
although in its own particular type of constancy (the continuity, with
apparently long interruptions, of the self-related moments).
Power-the capacity of securing a possession of violent possibilities.
As a securing, power is always related to a counter-power and for
that reason is never an origin.
16. Cf. Lecture course, Die Frage nach dem Ding: Zu Kants Lehre von den transzendentalen
Grundsiitzen, winter semester 1935-36 (GA41).
222 IV. The Leap [282-283]
Violence-powerless incursion into beings of a capacity for change
without a leap ahead and without a view toward possibilities. Wherever
beings are to be changed by beings (not out of beyng), violence is necessary.
Every act is one of violence, such that here the violence is mastered
by means of power.
160. Being-toward-death and being
Being-toward-death, in the most veiled forms, is the goad of the
highest historicality and is the secret ground of the decidedness toward
the shortest path.
Being-toward-death, unfolded as the essential determination of the
truth of Da-sein, nevertheless harbors two basic determinations of the
fissure and is its mostly unrecognized mirror image in the "there":
In the first place, being-toward-death conceals the essential belonging
of the "not" to being as such, which here, in the Da-sein that is
distinctive as grounding the truth of being, shows itself only in a
unique sharpness.
Secondly, it conceals the unfathomable fullness of the essence of "necessity,"
which in turn is one of the fissures of being itself; beingtoward-
death again taken in terms of Dasein.
The collision of necessity and possibility. Only in such spheres can
it be surmised what truly belongs to that which "ontology" treats as
the pale and vacuous jumble of "modalities."
161. Being-toward-death
No one has yet surmised or ventured to follow in thinking what was
thought ahead by means of the notion of being-toward-death in the
context of Being and Time and only in that context, i.e., thought only
within "fundamental ontology" and never conceived anthropologically
or in terms of a "worldview."
The uniqueness of death in human Da-sein belongs to the most
original determination of Da-sein, namely, to be ap-propriated by
beyng itself in order to ground this latter in its truth (openness of selfconcealing).
In the unusualness and uniqueness of death, what opens
up is the most unusual amid all beings, beyng itself, which essentially
occurs as estrangement. Yet in order to surmise anything at all of this
most original nexus, on the basis of the usual trite standpoint of common
opinion and calculation, what had to be made visible first and in
all sharpness and uniqueness is the relation of Da-sein to death itself,
§162 [283-284] 223
i.e., the connection between resoluteness (openness) and death, i.e.,
the running-ahead. Yet this running ahead toward death is not to be
made visible for the sake of attaining mere "nothingness," but just the
opposite, so that openness for beyng might be disclosed-fully and out
of what is most extreme.
It is quite to be expected that if these issues are not thought in
terms of "fundamental ontology" and with a view toward grounding
the truth of beyng, the worst and most absurd misinterpretations
will insinuate themselves and spread. A "philosophy of death" will
then naturally be devised.
The misinterpretations of precisely this section of Being and Time are
the clearest signs of the still-rampant incapacity to reenact the questioning
prepared there, which always means to think it more originally
and to surpass it creatively.
The essential context for the projection of death is the original futurity
of Dasein within its very essence (as that essence is understood in fundamental
ontology). In the framework of the task of Being and Time, this
primarily means that death is connected to "time," which in turn is established
as the domain of the projection of the truth of beyng itself.
This already shows, clearly enough for anyone who wants to participate
in the questioning, that there the question of death stands in an essential
relation to the truth ofbeyng and stands only in that relation. Accordingly,
death is not taken there, and is never taken, as the denial of beyng
or even, qua "nothingness," as the essence of beyng. Instead, the exact
opposite is the case: death is the highest and ultimate attestation of
beyng. Yet that can be known only by one who is capable of experiencing
and co-grounding Da-sein in the authenticity of selfhood. This authenticity
is of course not meant in a moral-personal sense but, ever and
again, in terms of "fundamental ontology" alone.
162. Beyng-toward-death
is to be grasped as a determination of Da-sein and only as such a determination.
Enacted here are the ultimate measuring out of temporality
and thereby the move into the space of the truth of beyng, the indication
of time-space: thus not in order to deny "beyng," but rather in order to
establish the ground of its complete and essential affirmability.
Yet how pathetic and cheap it is to latch onto the term "being-towarddeath"
and explain it as a crude "worldview," one which is then laid to
the charge of Being and Time. It seems that this reckoning works especially
well, since the "book" indeed also speaks of "nothingness" in
many other places. Hence the facile conclusion: being-toward-death,
224 IV. The [285-286]
i.e., being-toward-nothingness, and this as the essence of Da-sein! And
yet it is not supposed to be nihilism.
But the issue is surely not to dissolve being human [Menschsein] in
death and to declare being human an utter nullity. On the contrary,
the task is to draw death into Da-sein so that Da-sein might be mastered
in its abyssal breadth and thus the ground of the possibility of
the truth of beyng might be fully measured.
Not everyone, however, needs to carry out this beyng-towarddeath
and to take over the self of Da-sein in this authenticity. Rather,
to carry that out is necessary only in the sphere of the task of laying
the ground for the question of beyng, a task which is of course not
restricted to philosophy.
The carrying out of being-toward-death is a duty incumbent only
on thinkers of the other beginning, though every essential human
being, among the future creative ones, can know of it.
Being-toward-death would not be touched in its essentiality if it
did not give scholars in philosophy an occasion for tasteless scoffing
and journalists the right to know everything better.
163. Being-toward-death and being
Being-toward-death must always be grasped as a determination of Dasein,
which does not mean that Da-sein completely exhausts itself in it
but, on the contrary, means that being-toward-death is intrinsic to Dasein
and that only thus is Da-sein fully abyssal Da-sein. In other words,
only thus is Da-sein that "between" which offers a moment and a site
for the "event" and which can thereby belong to being.
If conceived in terms of "worldview," being-toward-death remains
inaccessible, and if it is misinterpreted in that way-as though beingtoward-
death were able to teach the meaning of being in general and
thus also its "nullity" in the ordinary sense-then everything is torn
from the essential nexus. What is not carried out is the essential,
namely the inclusive thinking of Da-sein, in whose clearing the fullness
of the essential occurrence of beyng is disclosed as it conceals
itself.
Here death comes into the domain of ground-laying meditation, not
in order to teach a "philosophy of death" as a particular "worldview,"
but so as to first bring the question of being onto its ground and to open
up Da-sein as the abyssal ground, to move Da-sein into the projection,
i.e., to under-stand in the sense of Being and Time (not somehow to make
death "understandable" to journalists and philistines).
§165 [286-287] 225
164. The essential occurrence ofbeyngl7
If beyngs [das Seyende] "are," then being cannot also be. Being would
then have to be posited as a being and therefore as a property of beings
or something added to beings. The question of being would thereby
have sunk back behind the first beginning. Thus beyng would still not
be questioned at all; instead, it would be denied. Yet in this way "beings"
would be veiled as well.
Being is not; nevertheless, we cannot equate it with nothingness. On
the other hand, we must indeed resolve to posit beyng as nothingness,
provided "nothingness" refers to what is not a being. Beyond this sort
of "nothingness," however, beyng "is" not again "something," whereby
we could rest assured that it can be represented and encountered. In
saying that beyng "essentially occurs" [west], we once again lay claim
to and use an expression that, linguistically, pertains properly to beings
(d. having been [Gewesen]-presencing [An-wesenJ).
Yet here, in this extremity, the word needs to be violent, and "essentialoccurrence"
[Wesung] is not supposed to name something that
lies beyond beyng; instead, it utters what is innermost to beyng,
namely, the appropriating event, that oscillation between beyng and
Da-sein in which the two are not objectively present poles but are the
pure coming to be of the oscillation itself.
The uniqueness of beyng and the fact that it cannot be represented in
the sense of something that is simply present constitute the most
pointed warding-off of determinations of beingness as iOea and yevoc,
["genus"], determinations that are necessary initially, when the
breakthrough to beyng from "beings" as q>lJ01C, first comes to pass.
165. Essence as essential occurrence1B
"Essence" no longer the KOlV6v and the yevoc, of ouota and of the r60£ 1:'1
(EKaorov) ["the this-what (the particular),,]; instead, essential occurrence
as the coming to pass of the truth of beyng and specifically in the full history
of beyng, which always includes the sheltering of truth in beings.
Because truth must be grounded in Da-sein, however, the essential
occurrence of beyng can be attained only in the constancy which
withstands the "there" in a knowledge determined accordingly.
17. The leap, The essence of beyng.
18. Cf. "The differentiation."
226 IV. The Leap [287-288]
Essence as essential occurrence is never merely representable; instead,
it can be grasped only in the knowledge of the temporalityspatiality
of truth and of its respective sheltering.
The knowledge of the essence requires Da-sein and is itself the leap
into Da-sein. Hence this knowledge can never be acquired through a
mere general consideration of the givens and of their already established
interpretation.
The essential occurrence does not reside "above" beings, separated
from them; instead, beings stand in beyng, and it is only in beyng,
standing therein and lifted out, that beings have their truth as the true.
Insofar as everything "categorial" and "ontological" falls on the "side"
of beingness, the "differentiation" between beyng and beings, along
with everything grounded on that differentiation, must now also be
posited and grasped in unity with this concept of essential occurrence.
166. Essential occurrence and essence19
grasped as the coming to pass of the truth of beyng. Beyng cannot be
conferred back onto the essential occurrence, for this latter would itself
then become a being. The question of the being of the essence is possible
and necessary only within the postulation of the essence as the
KOIVOV (d. the later question of universals). However the question of
being is answered, the "essence" itself will always be debased.
The concept of "essence" depends on the way of asking the question
of beings as such, i.e., the question of beyng, and, in unity with
that, on the way of questioning the truth of philosophical thought.
Also in the question of truth, the turning imposes itself: essence of
truth and truth of essence.
If we ask about the "essence" along the customary line of questioning,
then we are asking about what "makes" a being into that which it
is and, therefore, about what constitutes its quiddity, about the beingness
of beings. "Essence" is here merely another word for "being" (understood
as beingness). Accordingly, "essential occurrence" means the
event, insofar as the event appropriates that which belongs to it,
namely, truth. The coming to pass of the truth of beyng-that is essential
occurrence; thus essential occurrence is not ever a mode of
being that supervenes upon beyng or that even, as something in itself,
stands above beyng.
This mode of questioning only apparently brings questioning genuinely
forward (beings-their being-and then the being of such
19. Cf. Prospect, Inceptual thinking.
§167 [288-289] 227
being, and so on). How is it then to be cut off and led back into truly
genuine questioning? As long as questioning holds fast to ouata:, it
seems impossible to find a reason to discontinue questioning on in
the same way. The only option would be to deviate into the e1teKElva:.
As soon as "being" is no longer the representable (ioea:), as soon as,
consequently, being is no longer thought away from beings, "separated"
from them (out of a craving to grasp being as purely and as
unalloyed as possible), as soon as beyng is experienced and thought
as contemporaneous (in an original sense of time-space) with beings,
as their ground (not as cause and ratio), then there is no longer an
incentive to question beyng again with regard to its own "beyng," a
procedure which would represent beyng and thus would place it still
further away.
The trajectory of this meditation first makes it possible to discuss
the historical sequence of the concepts of essence, ones which have
emerged in the history of the guiding question as guidelines for the
question of beingness:
1. ouata: as iOea:
2. ouata: as discussed by Aristotle in books Z, H, e of the Metaphysics
3. the essentia of the Middle Ages
4. the Leibnizian concept of possibilitas (d. Ubungen on Leibniz)
5. The "condition of possibility" in Kant, the transcendental concept
of essence
6. Hegel's dialectical-absolute idealistic concept of essence.
167. Entering into the essential occurrence
Essence is merely represented, ioea:. Yet the essential occurrence is not
merely the mere combination of the "what" and the "how" and thus a
richer representation; instead, it is the more original unity of both.
The essential occurrence does not belong to every being; indeed it
fundamentally belongs only to being and to that which belongs to
being itself, namely, truth.
On the basis of the essential occurrence of being, the earlier "essence"
is now also transformed, corresponding to the inclusion of the
guiding question in the basic question.
The essential occurrence: that which we must enter into [einfahren],
Le., experience [erfahren]. Entrance into the essential occurrence,
so as to stand in it and withstand it, happens as Da-sein and as
its grounding.

V. THE GROUNDINGl
Grounding
Da-sein
Truth
Time-space
1. Cf. The question of truth as a precursory question.

a) Da-sein and the projection of being
168. Da-sein and beyng2
Da-sein means appropriation in the event, the latter taken as the essence
of beyng. Only on the ground of Da-sein, however, does beyng
enter into truth.
Where plant, animal, stone, sea, and sky come to be, without descending
into objectivity, there the withdrawal (refusal) of beyng is
reigning, i.e., beyng is reigning as withdrawal. But the withdrawal is
of Da-sein.
The abandonment by being is the first dawn of beyng as self-concealing
out of the night of metaphysics, through which beings pressed
forward into appearance and pressed forward objectivity, while
beyng became an addendum in the form of the apriori.
Yet how abyssally cleared must the clearing for self-concealing be,
such that the withdrawal might not appear superficially as mere nullity
but might reign as bestowal.
169. Da-sein3
The unrelenting strictness of the inner oscillation of Da-sein entails
that Da-sein does not count the gods, does not count on them, and
certainly does not reckon with an individual god.
This abstention from counting the gods pertains to each god, is attuned
to the unexpected ones, and remains far from the arbitrariness of
letting everything be deemed valid. For this abstention from counting is
2. Cf. Besinnung, p. 448ff.
3. Cf. The leap, 121. Beyng and beings.
232 V. The Grounding
already the consequence of a more original Da-sein which is gathered
into the encompassing refusaL i.e., into the essential occurrence of
beyng. Expressed in the still-surviving language of metaphysics, this
says: refusal as the essential occurrence of beyng is the highest actuality
of the highest possibility as possibility and thus is the first necessity. Dasein
is the grounding of the truth of this simplest fissure.
170. Da-sein
not something that could simply be found as given with some objectively
present human being; rather, the ground of the truth of beyng,
a ground necessitated by the basic experience of beyng as event.
Through this ground (and its grounding), the human being is transformed
from the ground up.
Only now does the animal rationale collapse, though we are in the
act of relapsing into it precipitously whenever we know neither the
first beginning and its end nor the necessity of the other beginning.
The collapse of the former "human being" possible only on the
basis of an originary truth of beyng.
171. Da-sein4
the ground of future human being, a ground that essentially occurs
in the grounding.
Da-sein-care.
The human being on this ground of Da-sein:
1. the seeker of beyng (event)
2. the preserver of the truth of being
3. the steward of the stillness of the passing by of the last god.
Stillness and origin of the word.
At first, however, the grounding of Da-sein is in itself transitional
and tentative-care, temporality [Zeitlichkeit]; temporality grounded
in primordial temporality [Temporalitat]: as the truth of beyng. Dasein
is related to truth as the openness of self-concealing, begun by
the understanding o/being. Projecting the open realm for being. Da-sein
as projection of the truth of beyng (the "there").
4. Cf. Uberlegungen V, p. 82f., "Plato."
[295-296] 233
172. Da-sein and the question of being
In Being and Time, Da-sein still has an appearance that is "anthropological,"
"subjectivistic," "individualistic," etc., and yet the opposite of
all this is in view there. It is admittedly not kept in view as what is
primarily and uniquely focused on. Instead, this opposite is in view
only as the necessary consequence of the decisive transformation of the
"question of being" from the guiding question into the basic question.
"Understanding of being" and "pro-jection" and indeed as thrown! The
being-in-the-world of Dasein. But "world" not the Christian saeculum and
the denial of God; atheism! World from the essence of truth and of the
"there"! World and earth (d. lecture on the work of art5).
173. Da-sez"n
is the crisis between the first and the other beginning. That says: "Dasein,"
terminologically and substantively, means something essentially
different in the history of the first beginning (i.e., in the entire
history of metaphysics) than it does in the other beginning.
In metaphysics, "Dasein"6 names the way, the mode, in which beings
are actual. It means something like "simply there" or, to take a step in
the direction of a more original interpretation, "presence." This designation
of beings can even be thought back into the way they are named
in the first beginning, i.e., into <jlU(Jl~ and the aA~e£la which determines
<jlU(Jl~. Accordingly, the full genuine content of the term "Dasein" in the
first beginning is as follows: to occur essentially (there) by emerging out of itself
as unconcealed. Throughout the entire history of metaphysics, however,
there can be seen the not-accidental practice of taking the term
that expresses the mode of the actuality of beings and carrying it over to
these beings themselves and thus to use "Dasein" to mean "the Dasein,"
namely, the whole actually existent being itself. "Dasein" is thus merely
the good German translation of existentia, the stepping forth and stand-
5. Freiburg lecture, "Vom Ursprung des Kunstwerkes," 1935.
6. Unhyphenated, an ordinary German term meaning "existence." It refers to
the fact that (da)S) something is (Sein). Heidegger says here that the term came to
be extended to the thing that has existence and thus with the definite article
(das Dasein) can mean "entity," any existent being. Heidegger proceeds in the following
paragraphs to distinguish from this his own hyphenated term Da-sein.
When Heidegger uses Existenz, another term for "existence," the German word
will always be indicated in brackets.-Trans.
234 V. The [296-297]
ing out of itself of the being, its coming to presence from itself
6:A~8na falling more and more into forgottenness).
The prevalent meaning of "Dasein" is nothing else. Accordingly,
one can speak of the Dasein ["existence"] of things, of animals, of
humans, of time, etc.
Altogether different from this, semantically and substantively, is the
word "Da-sein" in the thinking of the other beginning, so different that
there is no mediating transition from that first usage to the other.
Da-sein is not the mode of actuality of just any being; instead, it is
itself the being of the "there" [das Sein des Da]. The "there," however,
is the openness of beings as such and as a whole, the ground of the
more originally conceived 6:M8EHx. Da-sein is a way to be which "is"
the "there" (taking "is" in an active-transitive sense, so to speak)
such that in accord with this preeminent being [Sein], and as this
being [Sein] itself, Dasein is a unique being (that which essentially
occurs in the essential occurrence of beyng).
Da-sein is the properly self-grounding ground of the 6:A~8na of
<pU<Jl<;, the essential occurrence of that openness which first opens up
the self-concealing (the essence of beyng) and which is thus the truth
of beyng itself.
Da-sein, in the sense of the other beginning that asks about the
truth of beyng, can never be encountered as a characteristic of beings
which are simply to be found present at hand nor as a characteristic
of beings which allow present at hand beings to become objects and
which stand in various relations to objects. Furthermore, Da-sein is
not some characteristic of the human being, as if this name that previously
extended to all beings were now simply restricted, as it were,
to the role of designating the presence of human beings.
Nevertheless, Da-sein and human being are essentially related, inasmuch
as Da-sein signifies the ground of the possibility of future
human being, and humans are futural by accepting to be the "there,"
provided they understand themselves as the stewards of the truth of
beyng. This stewardship is indicated by the term "care." "Ground of
possibility" is still a metaphysical expression, but it is thought out of the
abyssal and steadfast belongingness.
Da-sein, taken in the sense of the other beginning, is still altogether
strange to us. We never simply come across it; instead, we
reach it only in a leap by leaping into the grounding of the openness
of what is self-concealing, the openness of that clearing of beyng in
which the human being to come must stand in order to keep it open.
Only from "Da-sein" in this sense does "Dasein" in the sense of
the presence of what is simply extant become "understandable." That
is, presence proves to be one particular appropriation of the truth of
§174 [297-298] 235
beyng, whereby the present, over and against the past and the future,
receives a determinately interpreted priority (which is entrenched
in objectivity, i.e., abjectness for a subject).
Da-sein, as the essential occurrence of the clearing of self-concealing,
belongs to this self-concealing itself, which essentially occurs as
the appropriating event.
All domains and viewpoints of metaphysics fail here and must fail if
Da-sein is to be grasped thoughtfully, for "metaphysics" asks about beingness
on the basis of beings (within the inceptual-i.e., definitiveinterpretation
of <pu(n~) and necessarily leaves unasked the question of
the truth of beingness and thus the question of the truth of beyng.
'AA~e£l(X itself is the first beingness of beings, and even this beingness
remains ungrasped.
In its previous and still usual sense, "Dasein" means presence in
some place or other; it means to turn up in a "where" and a "when."
In the other, prospective sense, "to be" [sein] does not simply mean
"to turn up"; rather, it signifies steadfast enduring as grounding the
"there" [Da]. The "there" does not refer to some determinable "here" or
"yonder"; it means the clearing of beyng itself. The openness of this clearing
first grants the space for every possible determinate "here" and
"yonder" and thus for the instituting of beings in historical word, deed,
and sacrifice.
Da-sein is the steadfast enduring of the clearing, i.e., of the freed,
unprotected, and belonging domain of the "there" wherein beyng
conceals itself.
The steadfast enduring of the clearing of self-concealing is taken
up in the seeking, preserving, and stewardship carried out by that
human being who has self-knowledge as one appropriated to being
and belonging to the event qua the essential occurrence of beyng.
174. Da-sein and steadfastness
Steadfastness as the domain of the human being who is grounded in
Da-sein.
Steadfastness includes:
1. strength-(by no means a mere accumulation of power; instead)
(as characterizing Da-sein) the mastery of the free bestowal of the
broadest fields of creative self-surpassing.
2. decisiveness-(by no means the hardness of obstinacy; instead)
the security of belonging to the event, the entry into the
unprotected.
236 v. The Grounding [298-300]
3. mildness-(by no means the weakness of leniency; instead) the
generous wakening of the concealed and retained, that which
ever strangely binds all creating into what is essential to creating.
4. simplicity-(by no means the "easy" in the sense of the everyday,
nor the "primitive" in the sense of the unconquered and futureless;
instead) the passion for the necessity of the single task of securing
the inexhaustibility of beyng in the shelter of beings and
not letting go of the strangeness of beyng.
175. Da-sein and beings as a whole
The first reference to Da-sein as the grounding of the truth of beyng is
made (Being and Time) in the course of asking about the human being
understood specifically as the projector of being and thus as detached
from all "anthropology." This reference could engender and strengthen
the erroneous opinion that Da-sein, if it is to be understood essentially
and fully, must be grasped only in this relation to the human being.
Yet meditation on the "there" as the clearing for self-concealing
(beyng) must already allow us to surmise how decisive the relation of
Da-sein to beings as a whole is, since the "there" sustains the truth of
beyng. If thought along these lines, Da-sein moves (though not localizable
anywhere) away from the relation to the human being and reveals
itself as the "between" which is developed by beyng itself so as to
become the open domain for beings that protrude into it, a domain in
which beings are at the same time set back on themselves. The "there"
is appropriated by beyng itself. The human being, as steward of the
truth of beyng, is subsequently appropriated and, as belonging to Dasein,
is appropriated in a preeminent and unique way. Therefore, as
soon as a first reference to Da-sein is achieved, heed must be taken of
what is announced in this reference as essential: the fact that Da-sein
is appropriated by beyng and that beyng as event forms the center of
all thinking.
Only in that way does beyng as event come fully into play. Yet
beyng is not, as in metaphysics, the "highest" to which there is only
an immediate return.
Accordingly, the "there" [das Da-] in its allocated power of clearing
must now be developed on the basis of beings as well, assuming they
have already begun to be beings more fully. Da-sein itself, as ap-propriated,
becomes more proper to itself and becomes the self -opening ground
of the self. Human stewardship only thereby receives its poignancy, decisiveness,
and intimacy.
§176 [300-301] 237
The question of who the human being is possesses now for the tIrst
time the openness of a path which nevertheless runs amid the unprotected
and upon which the storm of beyng is thus allowed to rage.
176. Da-sein.
Clarification of the word
This word [Da-sein], in the particular sense given it essentially and
first in Being and Time, cannot be translated; i.e., it resists the viewpoints
of the previous ways of thinking and speaking in Western
history as expressed in the term Da sein ["existence," "being there"].
In the usual sense, this term means "having arrived" and "being
present": e.g., the chair "is there" ["ist da"] the uncle "is there"; accordingly,
presence.
Da-sein signii1es a "being" itself and not a mode of being in the
sense just mentioned. Yet it does mean the mode of being in a distinctive
and unique case, namely insofar as the mode of being determines
the quiddity, the what-ness, precisely as who-ness, selfhood.
"The being" at issue, however, is not the "human being," and Da-sein
is not simply the human mode of being (still very easily misunderstood
in Being and Time). Instead, this being is Da-sein as the ground
of a determinate future being of the human being, not the ground of
"the" human being as such. There, too, insufi1cient clarity in Being
and Time.
The talk of "human Dasein" (in Being and Time) is misleading insofar
as it suggests that there might also be animal and plant "Dasein."
"Human Dasein" -here "human" does not indicate a specitIc difference
that would merely particularize the genus "Dasein" (as objective
presence). Rather, "human Dasein" signifies the uniqueness of that
being, the human being, to whom alone Da-sein is proper. How so?
Da-sein-the mode of being that is distinctive of humans in their
possibility; thus it is no longer at all necessary to add "human " [to the term
"Da-sein"]. In which possibility? In the highest one of humans,
namely the possibility of grounding and preserving truth itself.
Da-sein-that which at once grounds under the human being and
surmounts the human being. Hence we speak of the Da-sein in the
human being as the coming to pass of that grounding.
But we could also speak of the human being in Da-sein. The Dasein
"of" the human being.
Everything said in this regard is vulnerable and liable to be misinterpreted
if it does not enjoy the favor of those who participate in the questioning,
who carry it out to some essential extent, and from there-only
238 V. The Grounding [301-302]
from there-understand what is said while letting go of their precon~
ceived notions (d. Laufende AnmerkunBen zu "Sein und Zeit").
177. Being-away
Being-away [WeB-sein] = beinB-Bone [Fort-sein]; in this sense, simply
comparable to arrou<Jiu ["absence"] over and against rrupou<Jiu, Dasein
= objective presence (d. Away! = Gone! [weBnehmen = fortnehmen]).
On the other hand, as soon as Da-sein is understood in an essentially
different sense, the corresponding beinB-away is also understood
differently.
Da-sein: withstanding the openness of self-concealing. Beingaway:
pressing on with the closedness of the mystery and ofbeinB; forgottenness
of being. And this happens in beinB-away according to this
sense: to be infatuated with thinBs, smitten with them, lost in them.
BeinB-away, in this sense, only where Da-sein. "Away": the removal,
pushinB aside ofbeynB, i.e., apparently, only of "beings" for themselves.
Herein is expressed in converse the essential relation of Da-sein to
beyng. For the most part and in general our existence is a beingaway,
precisely in its "closeness to life."
This "clarification" could easily be held up as a paradigm case of
"philosophizing" with mere "words." But it is just the opposite: being-
away comes to be the name of an essential (and indeed necessary)
manner in which the human being relates-and indeed must
relate-to Da-sein. With this, Da-sein itself undergoes a necessary
determination.
Being-away not sufficiently expressed by "inauthenticity," inasmuch
as authenticity is not to be understood in a moral-existentiell
sense but, rather, in terms of fundamental ontology as a character of
that Da -sein which endures the "there" by sheltering the truth in some
fashion or other (such as thoughtfully or poetically, or by building,
leading, sacrificing, suffering, rejoicing).
178. "Da-sein exists for the sake of itself"
In what sense? What is Da-sein, and what does it mean to "exist"
[existieren]? Da-sein is the enduring of the truth of beyng, and Da·
sein "is" this, and only this, as an ex-sisting [ex-sistierend] self which
steadfastly withstands exposedness.
§180 [302-303] 239
"for the sake of itself," Le., purely as preservation and stewardship
of being, provided what is fundamentally essential is indeed the understanding
of being.
179. "Existence"
(Being and Time, [German] p. 42)
"Existence" ["Existenz"] is at first under the influence of the old concept
of existentia: not the "what" but the fact that something is and
how it is. But this as TW;POUcrta:, presence, extantness (the present).
Now, on the other hand: existence [Existenz] = the full phenomenon
of temporality and specifically as ecstatic. Ex-sistere: exposure to beings.
But the term already no longer used for some time, because liable to be misinterpreted
in the sense of "existential philosophy" [" Existenzphilosophie"].
Da-sein as ex-sistere: insertion into, and standing out into, the openness
of beyng. From here alone is determined the "what" (i.e., the
"who" and the selfhood) of Da-sein.
Ex-sistence [Ex-sistenz]: for the sake of Da-sein, i.e., for the sake of
grounding the truth of beyng.
Ex-sistence [Ex-sistenz] in the metaphysical sense: presencing,
coming to appearance. Ex-sistence [Ex-sistenz] in terms of the historicality
of being: steadfast transport into the "there."
180. Beyng and the understanding of being
Out of the understanding of being, abiding in this understanding,
which means-since understanding is the projection of the open
realm-standing in the openness.
To be related to what (namely, that which is self-concealing) opens
up in this openness.
The understanding of being does not make beyng "subjective" or, on
the other hand, "objective." It overcomes all "subjectivity" and transposes
the human being into the openness of being, i.e., poses the
human being as one who is exposed to beings (and exposed in the
first place to the truth of beyng).
Contrary to common opinion, however, beyng is the most strange
and the self-concealing, and yet it essentially occurs prior to all beings
that stand in it. This of course could never be comprehended in
terms of the previous concept of the "apriori."
240 V. The Grounding [303-304]
"Beyng" is not the dominion of a "subject." Instead, Da-sein, as the
overcoming of all subjectivity, itself arises out of the essential occurrence
of beyng.
181. The leap
is the opening-up self-projection "into" Da-sein. Da-sein is grounded
in the leap. Grounded through the leap is that to which the leap leaps
as opening up.
Self-projection: the self first becomes proper to "itself" in the leap.
Yet that is not an absolute creation; on the contrary, the thrownness
of the self-projection and of the projector opens up abyssally, very differently
than in the case of the finitude of the so-called objectively
present creations and productions of the demiourgos.
182. The projection of beyng.
The projection as thrown
The projection at issue is always only the one of the truth of beyng.
The very projector, Da-sein, is thrown-i.e., appropriated-by beyng.
The thrownness happens, and at the same time gives testimony of
itself, in the plight of the abandonment by being and in the necessity of the
decision.
Inasmuch as the projector projects and opens up the openness, this
opening up reveals that the projector himself is thrown and accomplishes
nothing but the catching hold of the oscillation in beyng, i.e., the
entrance into the oscillation and thereby into the event, and so first
becomes the projector, namely the preserver of the thrown projection.
183. The projection upon beyng
is unique, indeed such that the projector of the projection casts himself
out into the open realm of the projecting openness in order for
the first time to become himselfin this open realm which occurs as
ground and abyss.
"Entrance into the openness" -that erroneously sounds as if the
openness were already there, whereas it comes to be in the first place,
and only, with the very dislodgment into it.
§185 [304-3061 241
Prior to this dislodgment, being-away occurs and indeed even occurs
constantly. Being-away as denial of the exposure to the truth of beyng.
184. The question of being as the question of the truth of beyng
Here the essence of beyng cannot be read off from any particular
being or from all known beings taken together. Indeed a reading-off
is quite impossible. The task is an original projection and a leap that
can draw its necessity only out of the deepest history of mankind,
insofar as the human being is experienced and is sustained in essence
as the being that is exposed to beings (and, in the first place, to
the truth of beyng) such that this exposure constitutes the ground of
the essence of the human being (preserver, steward, seeker). Even
the postulation of the iSea is not a reading-off! To know this is already
to overcome such postulation.
Is the truth of beyng to be determined prior to beyng and without
regard to beyng, or after beyng and only with respect to it, or neither
of these but, instead, in unity with beyng because truth belongs to
the essential occurrence of beyng?
The transcendental way (though a different "transcendence")
merely provisional, in order to prepare the turnaround and the leap.
185. What does Da-sein mean?
1. The task in "beyng and time": the question of being as the question
of the "meaning of beyng"; d. the "Preliminary remarks" in
Being and Time.
Fundamental ontology transitional. It exposes the ground of
all ontology and overcomes all ontology but must necessarily proceed
from what is familiar and ordinary. Therefore fundamental
ontology always stands in a twi-light.
2. The question of being and the question of the human being. Fundamental
ontology and anthropology.
3. Being human as Da-sein (d. Laufende Anmerkungen zu "Sein und
Zeit").
4. The question of being as an overcoming of the guiding question.
Unfolding of the guiding question; d. the structure of that question.
What does un-folding mean? Reabsorption into the ground that is
to be opened up.
242 V. The Grounding [306]
186. Da-sein
The necessity of the originally grounding question of Da-sein can be
unfolded historically:
1. out of &Mena as the basic character of <pU01<;;
2. out of the question (compelled by the ego (ogito and touched upon
by Leibniz and German Idealism) of the double repraesentatio:
a. I represent something-have-there [Da-habe]
b. I represent something-am something; "being-there" ["Da-sein"].
In each case, the "there" is not questioned, just as &Mena was left
unquestioned in the beginning.
And in each case this "there" is only the derived open realm
which the correctness of representation must claim for itself and
for its own possibility.
b) Da-sein7
187. The grounding
is twofold:
1. The ground grounds, essentially occurs as ground (d. time-space
and the essence of truth).
2. This grounding ground, as such, is attained and taken up.
Fathoming the ground:
a) to let the ground essentially occur as grounding;
b) to build on it as the ground, to bring something to the ground.
The original grounding of the ground (1) is the essential occurrence
of the truth of beyng; truth is a ground in the original sense.
The essence of ground originarily out of the essence of truth; truth
and time-space (abyss).
Cf. "On the Essence of Ground"; annotations to it in 1936.
The title "The grounding," in accord with its connection to "The
leap," refers in the first place to meanings 2a and 2b. Yet it is therefore
not only related to meaning 1 but actually determined by that
meaning.
188. The groundingS
To fathom the ground of the truth of beyng and thus also to ground
beyng itself: to let this ground (the event) be the ground through the
constancy of Da-sein. Accordingly, the fathoming becomes the
7. Cf. Laufende Anmerkungen zu "Sein und Zeit" and Ubungen, Die metaphysischen
Grundstellungen des abendliindischen Denkens (Metaphysik), winter semester 1937-38.
8. Cf. Prospect, 13. Restraint. On restraint as the basic disposition; restraint and
care.
244 V. The Grounding [307-309]
grounding of Da-sein as the fathoming of the ground, i.e., of the truth
of beyng.
Ground - founding - bearing - covering
Abyss and distorted ground
I
concealment I Idissemblance I of being
occurrence of nothingness decomposition
There is an originary and essential relation between ground and
truth, provided truth is understood as the clearing-concealing. The relation
between ratio and veritas iudicii, which becomes visible (d. especially
Leibniz) in the history of the answers to the guiding questions,
is only a very superficial semblance of the original relation.
Truth, and with it the essence of ground, becomes temporallyspatially
dis-joined. But time and space are therewith grasped originarily,
on the basis of truth, and are essentially related to the ground.
In Being and Time, this relation is glimpsed but remains in the
background and is not mastered.
Only in fathoming the ground of the event does the steadfastness
of Da-sein succeed in the modes of the sheltering of truth in beings
and on the paths of that sheltering.
Here, in the sphere of grounding and of its thoughtful mastery, resides
the context in which time and space come to their essential concept.
The essence of Da-sein, and thus the essence of the history grounded
on Da-sein, is the sheltering of the truth of being, of the last god, in
beings.
On this basis the form and the type of the future ones are determined.
189. Da-sein
If Da-sein essentially occurs only as belonging to the event, then,
already with its first naming, that directive must be carried out in
virtue of which Da-sein is essentially other than the mere formal
determination (which does not concern us) of the ground of the
human being.
Da-sein, if spoken of "formally," must be experienced as fUlfilled,
which means as the first preparation for the transition into another
history of mankind.
Da-sein is experienced not when it is represented as an object but
when it is carried out and withstood as Da-sein through a dislodging
move into it.
§190 [309-310] 245
This entails withstanding the plight of the abandonment by being
in unity with the facing up to the decision regarding the remaining
absent and the advent of the gods: the first taking up of the post of
steward for the stillness of the passing by of the last god in that decision
(d. The leap, 133. The essence of beyng, p. 198).
The projection of Da-sein is possible only as a move into Da-sein.
Such a projection, however, arises only out of compliance toward the
most concealed junctures of our history in the basic disposition of restraint.
The essential moment, immeasurable in its breadth and depth,
has arrived when the plight of the abandonment by being dawns and
the decision is sought at once.
Admittedly, this basic "fact" of our history cannot be demonstrated by
any "dissection" of the "spiritual" or "political" "situation" of the times,
because the "spiritual" as well as the "political" viewpoints are limited to
the superficial and the hitherto and have already declined to experience
genuine history (the battle over the appropriation of the human being by
beyng) or to question and think in the paths of the disposal of this history,
i.e., to become historical out of the ground of history.
190. Of Da-sein9
Of Da-sein one can speak only by way of grounding-in a thoughtful
carrying out of the resonating, the interplay, and the leap.
"By way of grounding" means at the same time "historically" in
and for our history to come, compliant to its inmost plight (abandonment
by being) and to the necessity (basic question) that arises thereby.
This compliance, as the compliant preparation for the site of the
moment of the extreme decision, is the law of the thoughtful procedure
in the other beginning in contrast to the system at the end of the
history of the first beginning.
It must nevertheless be possible to provide a first naming and reference
to Da-sein and thereby an indication of it. To be sure, that
could never be an immediate "description," as if Da-sein were simply
to be found objectively present somewhere; nor could it be through a
"dialectic," which is the same approach on a higher level. Instead,
that indication must reside in a rightly understood projection which
brings forth the contemporary human being, even if only into abandonment
by being, and prepares the resonating of the fact that the
9. For an introductory clarification of the concept, d. Eine Auseinandersetzung
mit Sein und Zeit, 1936; d. Ubungen, Die metaphysischen Grundstellungen des abendlandischen
Denkens (Metaphysik), winter semester 1937-38.
246 V. The Grounding [310-311]
human being is the being which has broken out into the open. Initially
and for a long time, however, the human being is ignorant of
this outbreak and at last takes its measure, entirely and for the first
time, on the basis of the abandonment by being.
Outbreak and abandonment, intimation and entry-these are the occurrences
of appropriation; they belong together, and in them, apparently
seen only from the human standpoint, the event opens up
(d. domain of what is proper):
Human being
World
-J,
~E~
t
Earth
Gods (There)
From here we can already see which unitarily disposed power of
projection is required in order to carry out the leap that opens up as
a leap into Da-sein and in order to prepare the grounding in a sufficiently
questioning and knowing way.
Da-sein is the occurrence of the sundering of the axis for the turning of the
event. Sundering, first and foremost sundering, is appropriating, and out of it
arise respectively the historical human being and the essential occurrence of
being, the nearing and distancing of the gods.
Here is no longer any "encountering," no appearing for the human who
has already been established in advance and merely adheres henceforth to
what appeared.
The deepest essence of history rests also in the fact that the sundering appropriation
(which grounds truth) first lets arise those who, in dependence on
one another, first turn to and away from one another within the event of the
turning.
This sundering of nearing and distancing, which decides in each case between
abandonment and intimation or which from here veils itself in undecidedness,
is the origin of time-space and is the realm of strife.
Da-sein is the enduring of the essential occurrence of the truth of
beyng.
Unfolding of the thereness of the "there" as the grounding of Dasein.
The "there" essentially occurs and in so doing must be taken up into
the being of Da-sein; the "between."
191. Da-sein
is the axis in the turning of the event, the self-opening center of the
counterplay between call and belonging. Da-sein is the "domain of
§193 [311-313] 247
what is proper" [Eigen-tum, "property"], understood in analogy with
"domain of a prince" [Fiirsten-tum, "principality"], the sovereign center
of the appropriating eventuation as the assignment, of the ones who
belong, to the event and at the same time to themselves: becoming a self.
Thus Da-sein is the between: between humans (as grounding of
history) and the gods (in their history).
The "between": not one that simply results from the relation of the
gods to humans; rather, one that first grounds the time-space for
such a relation, in the sense that it itself springs from the essential
occurrence of beyng as event and in the sense that, as self-opening
center, it makes the gods and humans decidable for one another.
192. Da-sein
To the usual view directed toward "beings," Da-sein, as grounding the
openness of self-concealing, appears as nonbeing and imagined. In
fact, Da-sein, as the projecting-thrown grounding, is the highest reality in the
domain of imagination, assuming we understand the latter not simply as
a faculty of the soul and not simply as something transcendental (d.
Kant book), but as the event itself, wherein all transfiguration oscillates.
"Imagination" ["Einbildung"] as an occurrence of the clearing itself.
Yet "imagination," imaginatio, is a name that names from the viewpoint
of the immediate apprehending of OV and of beings. Calculated in those
terms, all beyng and its opening constitute a formed image [Gebilde] that
is added to what supposedly stands on its own. But all this is inverted:
what is "imagined" in the usual sense is always the so-called "really"
present at hand, for that is what is brought to an image, i.e., brought into
the clearing, into the "there," so as to appear.
193. Da-sein and the human being
The essence of the human being has long been determined with respect
to components: body, soul, spirit. There are different ways the
components are said to be arranged, to interpenetrate, and to have
priority over one another. What likewise changes is the role assumed
at any time by one of these "components" as the guideline and point
of reference for the determination of the rest of beings (e.g., consciousness
in the ego cog ito or reason or spirit or, for Nietzsche, the
"body" or the "soul," according on his intention).
Cf. 'AOyoe, (but not as subject and soul) and vaDe, in Pre-platonic
philosophy and tl>ux~ in Plato and Aristotle (~ tl>ux~ nx OVTa ltwe, Eonv
248 v. The Grounding [313-314]
["the soul is in a way the things"]); all of this indicates the fact that
something which is indeed the human being, but which nevertheless
surpasses and reaches beyond the human being, comes into play
each time for the determination of beings as such and as a whole.
Because the question of beings indeed had to be posed in the first
beginning and, as the guiding question, continued to be posed into
the future, despite Descartes, Kant, and others, so also something like
soul, reason, spirit, thought, or representation always had to supply
the guideline. To be sure, this happened in such a way that, on account
of the unclarity of the guiding questions themselves, the
guideline, too, remained undetermined in its character as guideline.
In absolutely no way was it asked why such a guideline is necessary
or whether, and to what extent, this necessity might not lie in the
essence and truth of being itself.
This surely indicates that what must be posed beforehand is the
question of the truth of beyng as the basic question and as essentially
different from the guiding question. Then what is unquestioned and
unmastered first steps forth, namely, that the human being, and then
again not the human being, and indeed in each case in a reaching out
and a dislodging, is somehow in play in the grounding of the truth of
beyng. Precisely what is thus question-worthy is what I call Da-sein.
Indicated thereby is also the origin of this that is question-worthy.
It does not arise out of an arbitrarily adopted philosophical, biological,
or in any sense anthropological consideration and determination
of the human being. It arises solely and uniquely out of the question
of the truth of being.
Thereby we also gain a unique and at the same time-if beyng
itself is the most unique and highest-most profound way of posing
the question of the human being.
Conversely, it now becomes necessary to confront the previous
history of the guiding question, to meditate, and to ask:
1. why and how, precisely in the interpretation of the human
being in connection with the question of beings, something like
¢UX~, VQu<;, animus, spiritus, cogitatio, consciousness, subject, ego,
spirit, and person becomes relevant?
2. whether or not and how must that which we call Da-sein necessarily
come into play here and indeed necessarily in a concealed
manner?
The answer to the first question must note that the prominence accorded
to ¢UX~, VQu<;, etc., as well as the way of interpreting them, are
guided by the interpretation of beings as <pual<; and later as {bfa,
EV£PY£la, Quaia and ultimately by Aristotle's interpretation of the ¢UX~
as Quaia and as the Evn::MX£la ~ npWTf] ["first consummation"]. This
§193 [314-315] 249
approach remains, in sundry variations, up to Hegel and Nietzsche;
the turn to the "subject" does not change anything essential. Correlatively,
the "body" is seen as a mere adjunct or substrate and is always
determined only in contrast to the soul, or in contrast to the spirit, or
in contrast to both soul and spirit.
Never does it come to the point of taking the being of human beings
as so interpreted, and specifically in their role as guideline for
the truth of beings, and of determining and interrogating the being
of humans on the basis of this truth in order to gain sight of the possibility
that here in the end human being undertakes, with regard to
being, a task which dis-lodges it from itself and into that which is
question-worthy, Da-sein.
Da-sein does not lead out of beings and does not make beings
evaporate into immateriality. It is just the opposite: in accord with
the uniqueness of beyng, Da-sein first opens up the restlessness of
beings, whose "truth" is endured only in the renascent battle over
their sheltering in what is created through historical human beings.
What we, steadfast in Da-sein, ground and create and, in creating, allow
to advance toward us in the manner of an assault-only that can be something
true and manifest and, consequently, recognized and known. Our
knowledge extends only as far as the steadfastness in Da-sein reaches out, and
that is the power of sheltering the truth into configured beings.
The Kantian critique of pure reason, which once again (since the
time of the Greeks) takes an essential step, must presuppose this nexus
without being able to grasp it as such and, afortiori, without being able
to bring it to a ground (the reciprocal relation of Dasein and being).
Because this ground was not grounded, the critique remained groundless
and had to lead soon to a development beyond itself, which was
carried out partially with its own means (the transcendental mode of
questioning), a development toward absolute knowledge (German
Idealism). Because it became absolute here, spirit had to involve in a
concealed way the destruction of beings and the complete suppression
of the uniqueness and strangeness of beyng and had to hasten that fall
into "positivism" and biologism (Nietzsche) which has been entrenching
itself more and more up to this very hour.
The present "confrontation" -if it at all deserves to be called such
-with German Idealism is merely "re-active" and absolutizes "life,"
in all the indeterminateness and confusion that can lurk in that
noun. The absolutizing is not only a sign of determination by the opponent;
it is above all an indication that a meditation on the guiding
question of metaphysics is operative there even less than in the opponent
(d. The interplay, llO. The iOea:, Platonism, and idealism, especially
p. 167£., Hegel).
250 V. The [31
Thus we also see the reason the question of truth, which Nietzsche
seems to pose out of an original power of questioning and deciding.
is precisely not posed by him at all. He merely explains truth biologically,
altogether out of a basic position in "life." That is, Nietzsche
bases himself on the traditional interpretation of beings as constancy
and presence and explains truth purely as a means of securing the
continuance of life.
To answer the second question we raised earlier, it must be said:
If Da-sein comes into play (and it must do so whenever beings as
such come into question, whereby so does the truth of beyng, al·
though in a concealed way), then we must examine what becomes
visible as the guideline when conceived thoroughly and universally
in correspondence to the inceptual interpretation of beings as constant
presence. This guideline is "thinking" as the representing of
something in general; here it is a matter of the highest generality, so
that this thinking is the most extreme representing.
The trace of Da-sein is visible in representing, namely, with respect
to the transport of Da-sein toward something. As a character of
Da-sein, representing is a standing out into the open realm, whereby
this standing out is concealed to itself and the open realm is interrogated
just as little as are the essence and ground of the openness.
Furthermore, representing is a standing out which at the same time
remains behind in the soul as a process and act of this soul, and the
soul itself, as an "I," ultimately forms that which is over and against
the object.
Correctness, as an interpretation of the open realm, becomes the
ground of the subject-object relation.
Yet inasmuch as what represents also represents itself, this stand·
ing out is merely reiterated and taken back into that which represents,
and what remains hidden is precisely what distinguishes Dasein,
namely, to be the "there," the clearing for self-concealment, in
the steadfastness of selfhood as grounding of the truth in beings.
If now, finally, representing is drawn into "life," then the Original
character of representing as a matter of Da-sein is completely covered
over. Representing itself is appraised only according to its use-value,
and such appraisal also attributes to representing the sense which it
alone can claim as "knowledge" over and against "action."
It seems unsurmountably difficult to find, out of such a representing
(appearing) of the world, a foothold for making Da-sein experienceable
and visible, especially since the presupposition for everything,
i.e., the power to question and the will to clarify, must be
dispensed with. How is the highest question of being supposed to become
a question in this wasteland!
§194 [317-318] 251
194. The human being and Da-sein
Why Da-sein as the ground and abyss of the historical human being?
Why not an immediate modification of the human being? Furthermore,
why should humans not remain as they are? In what way is
the human being then? Can that be established? On what basis?
Which appraisal according to which standards?
In the history of the truth of being, Da-sein is the essential intervening
incidence, i.e., the in-cident of that "between" into which humans
must be dis-lodged in order to first be themselves again.
Selfhood, as the path and the realm of the assigning appropriation-
to and of the origin of the "to" and the "self": the ground of the
belonging to beyng, a belonging that includes the (steadfast) consigning
appropriation. Consigning appropriation only where in advance
and constantly the assigning appropriation; but both out of the
ap-propriation proper to the event.
The belonging to beyng, however, essentially occurs only because
being, in its uniqueness, needs Da-sein and also needs what is therein
both grounded and grounding, namely, the human being. Truth
does not essentially occur otherwise.
Otherwise only nothingness dominates, in the most insidious
form of the nearness of the "actual" and the "living," i.e., in the form
of nonbeings.
Da-sein, grasped as the being of the human being, is already
grasped in advance. The question of the truth of this anticipatory grasp
remains the question of how humans, in coming to be more eminently,
place themselves back into Da-sein, thereby grounding Dasein,
in order thus to place themselves out into the truth of beyng.
This self-placing and its constancy, however, are grounded in the
appropriation. Therefore it must be asked:
In which history does the human being have to stand in order to
belong to the ap-propriation?
To that end, must humans not be thrust ahead into the "there," an
occurrence which becomes manifest to them as thrownness?
Thrownness is experienced only out of the truth of beyng. The
way thrownness was given a first preliminary interpretation (Being
and Time) made it liable to be misinterpreted in the sense of the mere
accidental occurrence of the human being among other beings.
Toward what power are earth and body kindled from here? Being
human and "life."
Where else than in the essence of beyng itself does there reside the
impetus to think out toward Da-sein?
252 V. The Grounding [318-3191
195. Da-sein and the human being
Who is the human being? The one needed by beyng for the sake of
withstanding the essential occurrence of the truth of beyng.
As so needed, however, humans "are" humans only inasmuch as
they are grounded in Da-sein, i.e., inasmuch as they themselves, by
creating, become the ones who ground Da-sein.
Yet beyng is also grasped here as appropriating event. Both belong together:
the grounding back into Da -sein and the truth of beyng as event.
We grasp nothing of the direction of the questioning that is opened
up here if we casually base ourselves on arbitrary ideas of the human
being and of "beings as such" instead of putting into question at one
stroke both the "human being" and beyng (not simply the being of
the human being) and keeping them in question.
196. Da-sein and a people!O
Only on the basis of Da-sein is it possible to grasp the essence of a people,
which means at the same time to know that a people can never be a
goal and a purpose. To hold the opposite opinion is merely a "popular"
expansion of both the "liberal" thought of the "I" and the economic
idea of the conservation of "life."
The essence of a people, however, is its "voice." This voice does precisely
not speak in the so-called immediate outpourings of the common,
natural, unspoiled, and unrefined "man." For this summoned
witness is already very spoiled and for a long time has not been moving
in the original relations to beings. The voice of a people seldom
speaks and speaks only in a few individuals. Can this voice still be
brought to resound?
197. Da-sein-domain of what is proper-sel/hood!!
Being a self is the essential occurrence of Da-sein, and the self of the
human being is attained only through steadfastness in Da-sein.
The "self" is customarily grasped only in the relation of an I to "itself."
This relation is taken as representational. And ultimately the selfsameness
of the one who is representing with that which is represented
10. Cf. The future ones.
11. Cf. Prospect, 16. Philosophy (meditation as meditation on oneself).
§197 [319-321] 253
comes to be taken as the essence of the "self." Yet in this way, or in any
variant of it, the essence of the self will never be reached.
For, in the first place, the self is not a property of an objectively
present human being, and only semblantly is the self given with [consciousness.
The provenance of this semblance can be clarified only
on the basis of the essence of the self.
Selfhood, as the essential occurrence of Da-sein, arises out of the origin
of Da-sein. And the origin of the self is the domain of what is proper.
This term taken in analogy with "domain of a prince." The reigning of
appropriation in the event. Appropriation [Eignung] is at once assignment
[Zu-eignung] and consignment [Ubereignung]. Inasmuch as Dasein
is assigned to itselfas belonging to the event, Da-sein does come to
its self, but never as if the self were already an objectively present item
that simply had not previously been reached. Rather, Da-sein comes to
itself first precisely when the assignment to the belonging becomes at
once a consignment into the event. Da-sein: enduring of the "there." The
domain of what is proper, as the reigning of appropriation, is the occurrence
of the intrinsically conjoined assignment and consignment.
Steadfastness in this occurrence of the domain of what is proper
first enables one to come to "oneself" historically and to be with oneself.
And only this "with oneself" is the sufficient ground for truly
taking on the "for others." But this coming to oneself is most definitely
never a previous, detached representation of the I. Instead, it is
the acceptance of the belonging to the truth of being; it is leaping
into the "there." The domain of what is proper, as the ground of selfhood,
grounds Da-sein. Yet the domain of what is proper is itself, for
its part, the enduring of the turning in the event.
The domain of what is proper is thus at the same time, by way of Dasein,
the ground of restraint.
The relation back which is named in the terms "self," to "itself,"
with "itself," and for "itself" has its essence in appropriation.
Now, inasmuch as the human being, even in the abandonment by
being, still stands in the open realm of the distorted essence of beings,
the possibility is always given to be for "oneself," to come back to "oneself."
But the "oneself" and the self which is thereby determined as
merely something self -same remain empty and are filled only out of
what is objectively present and lying there and at the moment dealt
with by the human being. The to-oneself has no decisional character
and is without knowledge of the bond to the occurrence of Da-sein.
Selfhood is more originary than any I or thou or we. These are as such
first gathered in the self and thereby become each respective "self."
Conversely, the dispersal of the I, the thou, and the we, as well as
their crumbling and massing together, are not simple human failures;
254 V. The Grounding [321-322]
they are the occurrence of the powerlessness to endure and know the
domain of what is proper, i.e., they are the occurrence of the abandonment
by being.
Being a self-by that we always mean immediately: doing, omitting,
and disposing on one's own initiative. But the "on one's own initiative"
is superficial and illusory. It can amount to sheer "self-will,"
from which is missing all assignment and consignment out of the
event.
The amplitude of the oscillation of the self takes direction from
the originality of the domain of what is proper and thus from the
truth of beyng.
Expelled from this truth and floundering in the abandonment by
being, we know little enough of either the essence of the self or the
ways to genuine knowledge. For, all too tenacious is the priority of "1"consciousness,
especially since this consciousness can be concealed in
diverse forms. The most dangerous forms are those whereby a worldless
"I" apparently gives itself up and submits to an other which is
"greater" than itself and to which it is assigned piecemeal or in stages.
The dissolution of the "I" into "life" as a people: here the path to an
overcoming of the "I" is paved by foregoing the very first condition of
such an overcoming, namely, meditation on being a self and on its essence,
an essence determined by assignment and consignment.
Selfhood is the trembling of the countering of the strife in the fissuring, and
this trembling is seized from out of the appropriation and withstands the
appropriation.
198. The grounding of Da-sein as a creative grounding12
Da-sein can never be exhibited and described like something obje(>
tively present. Only to be grasped hermeneutically, i.e., according to
Being and Time, in the thrown projection. Therefore not arbitrarily.
Da-sein is something completely un-usual and is sent on far ahead of
all knowledge regarding the human being.
The "there": the open, clearing-concealing "between" in relation
to earth and world, the center of their strife and thereby the site of
the most intimate belonging-to, and so the ground of the to-itself, of
the self and of selfhood. The selfis never the "1." The with-itself of the
self essentially occurs as steadfast ac-ceptance [Ober-nahme] of the
ap-propriation. Selfhood is belongingness in the intimacy of tht:
strife as the conflict over appropriation.
12. Letting the ground occur essentially; the event the ground.
§200 [322-323] 255
If instituted on their own initiative, no "we" and "ye" and no "I"
and "thou" and likewise no community can ever reach the self. Unless
these are first grounded on Da-sein, they merely miss the self and remain
excluded from it.
The grounding of Da-sein transforms every relation to beings, and
the truth of beyng is first experienced.
199. Transcendence, Da-sein, and beyng13
Even if "transcendence" is grasped differently than before, i.e., as
surpassing rather than as a super-sensible being, even then the essence
of Da-sein is all too easily distorted by this determination. For, even
in this way, transcendence presupposes a below and a hither side and is
still in danger of being misinterpreted as an act of an "1," a subject.
Thus in the end even this concept of transcendence is mired in Platonism
(d. "On the Essence of Ground").
Initially, Da-sein stands in the grounding of the event, creatively
grounds the truth of being, and does not pass from beings to their being.
Instead, the creative grounding of the event occurs as a sheltering of
truth in beings and as a being; therefore, if a comparison were still
possible at all, which is not the case, the relationship is actually the
other way around.
Beings as such are first sheltered in beyng, admittedly such that
they can at once be abandoned by beyng and persist only as mere
semblance: ov as lOEa, and what followed this and from this.
200. Da-sein
as time-space, not in the sense of the usual concepts of time and
space, but as the site of the moment for the grounding of the truth of
beyng.
The site of the moment arises out of the solitude of the great stillness
in which the appropriation becomes truth.
When and how was the site of the moment for the truth of beyng last
thoughtfully interrogated, and its grounding prepared, in a radical way
and without regard for everything previously usual and incidental?
How is the answer to that question affected by meditation on the
basic metaphysical positions within the history of the responses to
the guiding questions?
13. Cf. The interplay, llO. The tOEa, Platonism, and idealism.
256 V. The Grounding [323-324]
Time-space is to be unfolded in its essence as the site of the moment of
the event. But "moment" is by no means merely an infinitesimal,
scarcely graspable remnant of "time."
201. Da-sein and being-away
Being-away can also be understood in another, no less essential sense,
namely: if Da-sein is experienced as the creative ground of being
human and there then arises the knowledge that Da-sein is sheer moment
and history, then the ordinary way of being human must be
determined as being-away. It is "removed" from the enduring of the
"there" and is only with beings as things objectively present (forgottenness
of being). The human being is the away [das Weg].
Being-away is the more original term for the inauthenticity of
Da-sein.
Being-away: the manner of bustling about with objectively present
things; this manner is conceived on the basis of the "there" and belongs
to the "there."
In addition, however, being human must now be grounded precisely
as that which in turn preserves and develops Da-sein and both prepares
for and also resists the creative ones.
202. Da-sein
(Being-away)
Only as historical is the human being the "there," Le., only as
grounding of history and steadfast in the "there" by way of sheltering
the truth in beings.
Da -sein can be endured steadfastly only in the highest creativewhich
at the same time means suffered-traversal of the farthest
reaching transports.
To the "there" belongs, as its extremity, this concealment in its most
proper open realm, i.e., the "away" as the constant possibility of beingaway;
the human being is acquainted with the "away" in the various
forms of death. If Da-sein is to be genuinely grasped for the first time,
death must be determined as the most extreme possibility of the
"there." If now one speaks of an "ending"-and above all if Da-sein is
sharply delimited against every sort of objective presence, then "ending"
can by no means signify the mere discontinuing or disappearing
of something objectively present. If time, precisely as temporality, is
transport, then "ending" here means a "no" and something other than
§203 [324-326] 257
this transport: it means a complete dislodging of the "there" as such
into the "away."
Nor does "away" mean "gone away" in the sense of the mere absence
of something hitherto objectively present; rather, being-away
is the completely other of the "there," entirely concealed to us, but in
this concealment essentially belonging to the "there" and to be coendured
in the steadfastness of Da-sein.
Death, as the extremity of the "there," is at the same time what is
innermost to a possible complete transformation of the "there." Also
lying in this is a reference to the deepest essence of nothingness. Only
the ordinary understanding, which fastens onto objectively present
things as the sole beings, thinks of nothingness in an ordinary way,
not in the least surmising the intrinsic relation between the "away"
and the dislodging of all beings in their belonging to the "there." What
now protrudes into the "there" as the most proper concealedness,
namely, the reciprocal relation of the "there" to the "away" which is
turned toward it, is a reflection of the turning in the essence of being
itself. The more originally being is experienced in its truth, the deeper
is the nothingness as the abyss at the edge of the ground.
It would certainly be easy to account for what has just been said
about death by fitting that into the untested, everyday notions of the
"end" and "nothingness" instead of doing the opposite, Le., learning
to surmise how, with the steadfast and transporting incorporation of
death into the "there," the essence of the "end" and of "nothingness"
must be transformed.
The intimacy of being has wrath as its essence, and the strife is
always at the same time confusion. Both can always be lost in the
wasteland of indifference and forgottenness.
Running ahead toward death is not the same as willing nothingness
in the usual sense; on the contrary, it is the highest Da-sein, the one
that incorporates the concealedness of the "there" into the steadfastness
of enduring the truth.
203. The projection and Da-sein14
The projection is first the "between" in whose openness beings become
distinguishable from beingness such that initially only beings
themselves (Le., precisely concealed as such and thus concealed with
respect to their beingness) can be experienced. The mere transition
14. Cf. Prospect, Inceptual thinking; d. Prospect, 17. The necessity of philosophy.
258 V. The Grounding [326]
to the essence as {btu and likewise the reference to the necessary
pregivenness of "beings" are both mistaken about the projection.
But how the projection and its essential occurrence as Da-sein remain
covered over by the predominance of representation, how the
subject-object relation arises and so does the "consciousness" of H[
represent," and then how, in opposition, "life" is emphasized. That finally
Nietzsche re-acts in this way: the clearest evidence of the nonoriginariness
of his questioning.
The task is not to "explain" the projection but to transfigure it in
its ground and abyss and to dis-lodge human being into it, i.e., into
Da-sein, and thus to show human being the other beginning of its
history.
15 C) The essence of truth
204. The essence aftruth
Are we not asking here about the truth of the truth, and with that question
are we not starting a vacuous march into vacuity?
The grounding of essence is a projection. Yet what counts here is the
projection of the very domain of projection, and the task is thereby an
originary taking over of thrownness, i.e., a taking over of the necessity
of the belonging to beings themselves (in the mode of thrownness into
the "amidst"), a necessity which arises out of and together with the
need for the projection.
If truth here means the clearing of beyng as openness of the "amidst"
of beings, then it is not at all possible to ask about the truth of this
truth unless truth is taken in the sense of the correctness of the projection-
but that would in many respects miss what is essential. For, on
the one hand, it is altogether impossible to ask about the "correctness"
of a projection, and that applies afortiori to the correctness of that projection
whereby the clearing as such is grounded in general. On the
other hand, "correctness" is a "species" of truth which falls short of the
originary essence, since it is a consequence of that essence and therefore
already is not enough for grasping the original truth.
IS. Cf. Prospect, S. For the few-For the rare, p. 13; Prospect, 9. Conspectus; the
separate treatise as a precursory question; 'AA~eEta:: Die Brinnerung in den ersten Anfang;
Das Da-sein; Laufende Anmerkungen zu "Sein und Zeit," §44, pp. 103-122; lecture,
"Vom Wesen der Wahrheit," 1930; "Vom Wesen des Grundes 1," author's
own copy and annotations, in Wegmarken (GA9); Frankfurt lectures, "Der Ursprung
des Kunstwerkes," 1936, in Holzwege, especially p. 2Sff. (GAS); lecture
course, Grundfragen der Philosophie: Ausgewiihlte "Probleme" der "Logik," winter semester
1937-38 (GA4S, p. 27ff.), fundamentals for the question of truth.
260 V. The Grounding [328--329]
Then is the projection purely arbitrary? No, of the highest necessity;
admittedly not in the sense of a logical consequence which could be
demonstrated through propositions.
The necessity of the plight. Plight of what? Of beyng itself, which
must bring into the open, and thus overcome, its first beginning
through the other beginning.
In the usual horizon of "logic" and of the predominant thinking,
the projection of the grounding of truth remains pure arbitrariness,
and only here is the way free to the infinite and apparently exhaustive
questioning back into the truth of the truth of the truth and so
on. Here truth is taken as an object of calculation and computation,
and ultimate intelligibility by an everyday machinational understanding
is claimed as the measure. In fact, arbitrariness now shows
itself, for this claim has no necessity-it lacks the plight since it derives
its apparent justification from the lack of a sense of plight in
what is self-evident. This presupposes that the claim could in some
way yield to questions of justification with regard to itself, although
such questions indeed lie furthest removed from everything selfevident.
And what is more self-evident than "logic"!
But the essential projection of the "there" is the unprotected carrying out of
the thrownness that first emerges in the throwing.
205. The openJ6
is indicated only as a condition with reference to correctness, but in
that way not arisen in itself.
The open:
as the free domain of the boldness of creating,
as the unprotectedness of the carrying out of thrownness; both belonging
together as the clearing of self-concealing.
The "there" as ap-propriated in the event.
This free domain over and against beings. The unprotected through
beings. The temporal-spatial playing field of confusion and of intimations.
That which belongs to beyng.
16. Truth and Da-sein.
§207 [329-330] 261
206. From aA~8na to Da-sein17
1. The critical regress from correctness to openness.
2. Openness first the essential extent of aA~ena, the latter still undetermined
in that respect.
3. This essential extent itself determines the "place" (time-space) of
openness: the cleared "amidst" of beings.
4. Thereby truth definitively detached from all beings no matter how
they are interpreted, whether as <pucrt<;, iMa or perceptum, object,
the known, that which is thought.
5. Truth: now even more the question of its own essential occurrence;
this latter determinable only out of the essence, and that in
turn out of beyng.
6. The original essence, however, is the clearing of self-concealing;
i.e., truth is the original truth of beyng (event).
7. This clearing essentially occurs and is in the attuned, creative undergoing:
i.e., truth "is" as grounding the "there" and as Da-sein.
8. Da-sein the ground of the human being.
9. Thereby asked anew: who is the human being?
207. From aM8na to Da-sein
Grasped inceptually as the basic character of <pucrt<;, aA~9na by its
very essence debars every question of its relation to an other, e.g., to
thinking. That relation can be interrogated only if the inceptual essence
of aA~ena has already been renounced and truth has become
correctness.
In opposition to this, aA~9£ta does require a more originary interrogation
of its own essence (Whence and wherefore concealment and
unconcealment?). To pose this question, however, it is necessary at
first to grasp aM9na in its essential extent as the openness of beings.
This extent indicates at the same time the place demanded by the
openness of beings themselves for such openness to occur as the
cleared "amidst" of beings.
Thereby, however, aA~9na is detached from all beings, so decisively
that the question of its own beyng now becomes inescapable,
inasmuch as its beyng is determined by aA~9na itself out of the essential
occurrence of aA~8£ta.
17. Cf. the question of truth in the lecture course, Grundfragen der Philosophie:
Ausgewahlte "Probleme" der "Logik," winter semester 1937-38 (GA45).
262 V. The Grounding [330-3311
Yet the essential occurrence of the original truth can be experienced
only if this cleared "amidst," which grounds itself and detef<
mines time-space, is reached in a leap as that from which and for which
it is the clearing, namely, for self-concealing. Self-concealing, however,
is the basic teaching of the first beginning and of its history (metaphysics
as such). Self-concealing is an essential character of beyng and
is so indeed precisely insofar as beyng needs truth and thus ap-propriates
Da-sein and in that way is in itself and originally the event.
Now the essence of truth is originally transformed into Da-sein, and
now it makes no sense at all to ask whether and how "thinking" (which
inceptually and in its lineage pertains only to aM9£l(x and 6po{wcrt~)
could carry out and take over "unconcealedness." For, in its possibility,
thinking itself is now entirely entrusted to the cleared "amidst."
The reason is that the essential occurrence of the "there" (the essential
occurrence of the clearing for self-concealing) can be determined
only out of itself, and Da-sein can reach grounding only out of
the clearing relation of the "there" to the self-concealing as beyng.
For reasons that will subsequently become evident, no "faculty" of
the human being as previously understood (animal rationale) is then
sufficient. Da -sein grounds itself and essentially occurs in an attuned,
creative undergoing and thus itself first becomes the ground
and that which grounds the human being. And the human being is
now newly confronted with the question of the who, a question
which interrogates the human being more originarily as steward of
the stillness for the passing by of the last god.
208. Truth
How could truth be for us that last remnant of the extreme deterioration
of the Platonic aA~9£ta (iOEa), the validity of correct findings in
themselves as an ideal, i.e., the greatest of all indifferences and
weaknesses?
Truth, as the event of what is true, is the abyssal fissure in which
beings are divided and must stand in the strife.
Truth for us is also not what is firmly established, that suspicious
offspring of validities in themselves. Nor is it the mere opposite, the
crude and constant flux of all opinions. Truth is the abyssal center
which trembles in the passing by of the god and thus is the withstood
ground for the grounding of creative Da-sein.
Truth is the great disdainer of all that is "true," for the latter immediately
forgets truth, the sure kindling of the simplicity of the
unique as what is essential in each case.
§209 [331-332]
209. 'AM9na-openness and the clearing of what is
self-concealing
263
Roughly speaking, these are different terms with the same meaning.
Nevertheless, they harbor a decisive question.
1. Already aA~e£la does not always stay the same. Already here it
must be asked how aA~e£la was experienced at the beginning, how
far its determinateness reached, whether in general it was first
through the Platonic ~uy6v that the initial determination was attained,
and with this also whether the essential restriction-predelineated
by the understanding of being (c:pucrl~)-was already definitively
established, i.e., the restriction to the outward look and later to
an ob-ject for a perceiver.
'AA~e£la itself is forced into a "yoke" and, as "luminosity," concerns the
unconcealedness of beings as such and the pathway for perception.
Thus it concerns only the domain of the respective facing sides of beings
and the soul. Indeed aA~e£la first determines this domain as such,
though assuredly without allowing its own beyng and ground to
come into question.
Since in this way aMe£la becomes c:pw~ ["light"]' i.e., is understood
in terms of luminosity, the character of the alpha-privative is
also lost. The concealedness and the concealing, their origin and their
ground-these never become a question. What is taken into account
is only, so to speak, the "positive" aspects of unconcealedness, what
is freely accessible and the bestowal of access; and therefore aM9£la
in this regard as well loses its original depth and its abyssal character,
assuming aA~e£la was ever thoughtfully interrogated along those
lines. And nothing points in that direction, unless we suppose that
the breadth and indeterminateness of aA~e£la in pre-Platonic usage
also demanded a correspondingly indeterminate depth.
Plato turns aA~e£la into accessibility in a double sense: beings as
such as standing freely accessible and the accessibility of the pathway
for perception. If aA~e£la is viewed solely from the "side" of beings as
such, then this accessibility can also be called manifestness and perceiving
can be called making manifest.
'AA~e£la everywhere remains the unconcealedness of beings, never
that of beyng; it is never the latter, because aA~e£la itself in this inaugural
interpretation constitutes beingness (c:pUcrl~, e-mergence [Aufgang]),
iOEa, visibility.
What thereby gets lost back into the first beginning, so that concealedness
and concealing, as such, are never questioned?
264 V. The Grounding [333-334]
'AA~ena continues to be understood as accessibility and manifest·
ness (bl'jAOUll£Vov), and what remains uninterrogated therein, apart
from concealment in particular, is openness as such.
Thus, even if the term aMena can still be claimed, here what is
other must be seen and pondered, despite a deeper historical nexus.
II. Openness is:
1. originally the manifold-unitary, not only that "between" (~uy6v) for
the perceptible and the perceiving; not only something multiple
and diverse. Instead, openness must be interrogated as this unity.
2. Not only perception and cognition, but every sort of comportment
and attitude, and especially what we are calling disposition, belong
to openness. The latter is an occurrence, not a state.
3. the open realm as opened up and self-opening, the encompassment,
the dis-closure.
210. Concerning the history of the essence of truth
Since Plato, aA~ena as the illumination in which beings as such stand,
the visibility of beings as their presence (aA~ena Kat ov). Also as the
illumination which VO£lV needs in order to see. Thus the illumination
that which couples ov n ov and vO£lv, the ~uy6v.
'AA~ena now as a ~uy6v in the relation of the perceiver to the things
encountered, and so aA~ena itself constrained into the "yoke" of
correctness.
Cf. Aristotle: the aAl'je£unV rf\<; ¢uxf\<; ["the unconcealing of the
soul"]. 'AA~ena becomes accessibility; beings as such standing in the
open; pathway for perception.
Thus the stages:
From aA~ena (as cpw<;) to ~uy6v.
From ~uy6v to 01loiw(Jl<;.
From 01loiw(Jl<; to veritas as rectitudo; at the same time, truth, i.e.,
the correctness of an assertion, is here grasped with respect to assertions
and so as (JUllrrAOK~ ["connection"], connexio (Leibniz).
From rectitudo to certitudo, certainty of a conjunction (connexio?).
From certitudo to validity as objectivity.
From validity to effectivity.
Through the introdllction of the ~uy6v, truth is apprehended, but in
such a way that aA~e£L\X is thereby claimed to be both the unconcealedness
of beings as beings and the domain of visibility for seeing and
grasping. That means: inasmuch as a positing of correctness occurs,
aMena is laid down in that restricted double sense as the ground of
§211 [334-335] 265
correctness and indeed in such a way that the ground is laid down
only in the groundedness of what is posited by its insightfulness (on
this ground). Therefore 61loiwO'u; is precisely still aA~e£HX (or, to speak
in the Greek manner, rests on this ground and essentially occurs in
it as its essence) and so can and must still be called aA~e£l(X.
Subsequently, however, aA~emt as such gets lost. All that remains as
first and last is conformity, rectitudo, and within this determination an
explanation of "correctness" must be sought out of the respective interpretation
of the human being (as soul) and of beings, provided "correctness"
is not altogether taken as purely and simply self-evident.
211. 'AA~e£ux
The crisis of its history in Plato and Aristotle, its last
glimmering and complete collapse
1. 'AA~e£l(X Kat ov-unconcealedness, and specifically that of beings
as such, in the Platonic sense of the iOEa; aA~e£la always on the
side of ov; d. the passages at the end of Book VI of the Republic.
2. The lighting up of beings as such; from beings themselves the
lighting, the illumination, in which beings essentially occur. The
illumination seen as coming from beings, insofar as beings are seen
in terms of iOEa (at the same time, from the "a-" comes the "over
and against").
3. As coming from there, whereto is the light cast? Toward what else
than perception? And perception, for its part, occurs in moving
toward beings, and this per-ception is possible only in the illumination
and in traversing it. Thus it is the illumination-i.e., the iOEa itself
as what is seen-which is the yoke, the ~1Jy6v, although that is
characteristically never made explicit.
4. The yoke (i.e., truth understood as a yoke) is the preliminary form
of truth as correctness inasmuch as the yoke is taken as that which
couples and is not grasped and fathomed as the ground for the correspondence.
In other words, aA~e£la is genuinely lost. There remains
only the memory of the image of the "light" which is necessary
for "seeing" (d. the medieval lumen!).
Plato grasps aA~e£la as ~1Jy6v. On the basis of ~1Jy6v, however,
aA~e£la can no longer be mastered; but the converse is indeed possible.
The step toward 61loiwO'u; has thus been taken. The interpretation
of the ~1Jy6v as aA~e£la is correct, but it must be recognized
that aA~e£la itself is thereby interpreted in a definite respect and
that a genuine questioning of aA~e£la is henceforth cut off.
266 V. The Grounding [335-336]
5. What was said in point 4 is ineluctable, because point 2 holds
good, i.e., because aA~e£la is always understood in a genuinely
Greek way solely on the basis of beings and their constant presence;
at best, it is understood as the "between."
Yet, as history shows, that is not sufficient. Unconcealedness
must be fathomed and grounded as the openness of beings as a
whole, and openness must be fathomed and grounded as the
openness of self-concealing (being), and the latter as Da-sein.
212. Truth as certainty
Insofar as ratio is here not at first opposed to fides but, as equal to fides,
wants to stand on its own, what remains to ratio (representation) is
only the relatedness to itself for the sake of possessing itself in its own
way. This representation of the "1 represent" is certainty, the knowledge
that is known to itself as such.
Thereby, however, ratio itself degrades itself below itself, descends
below its own "niveau," which in the beginning consisted indeed in
the immediate perception of beingness as a whole.
Reason [Vernunft], degraded in this way, is brought to the mere semblance
of a mastery (on the basis of the self-demeaning). This semblance
of mastery must be shattered some day, and the present centuries are
carrying out this shattering, though it is necessarily accompanied by
the continuous increase of "rationality" as "principle" of machination.
As soon as reason is degraded below itself, however, it becomes
more graspable to itself, so much so that it now completely draws from
this result the paradigm for understandability and insightfulness.
Such insightfulness then becomes the measure for what is valid and
can be valid, i.e., now, for what is allowed to be and may be said to be.
Being itself now becomes all the more graspable, customary, and
free of any strangeness.
What is established in Plato, especially the priority of beingness as
interpreted on the basis of T£XVll, is now so sharply intensified and
elevated into exclusivity that there is created the basic condition for
a human era in which "technology" (the priority of what is machinationa!,
of regulations and procedures over that which is affected by
these and taken up into them) necessarily assumes the mastery.
Beyng, and truth as certainty, now become self-evident without
limit. The fact that beyng is forgettable thereby becomes an axiom,
and the forgotten ness of being, which sets in at the beginning, expands
and overlays all human comportment.
§213 [336-338] 267
The disavowal of all history rises up as the shifting of every occurrence
into what can be made and arranged, something that first reveals
itself fully in the fact that-without any relation and only in
the manner of a doctrinal context-it concedes validity somewhere
and somehow to some "providence" or "destiny."
Yet certainty as ego-certainty sharpens the interpretation of the
human being as animal rationale. The result of this process is "personality,"
and even today many still believe, and would like to make others
believe, that "personality" is the overcoming of egoity. In fact, it can
only mask egoity.
What does it signify that Descartes still attempts to justify certainty
itself as lumen naturale on tpe basis of the highest among beings as creatum
creatoris?
What form does this nexus assume later on? In Kant, it occurs as
the doctrine of the postulates! In German Idealism, as the absoluteness
of the ego and of consciousness!
All of these forms are simply deeper-set (on a transcendental ground)
reproductions of Descartes' course of thought: ego, ens finitum, causatum
ab ente infinito.
On this path, the anthropomorphization of being and of its truth
(ego-certainty of reason), already predetermined at the beginning,
is ultimately raised into the absolute and thus seems to be overcome in
the genuine sense. Yet everything here is the opposite of an overcoming
and is in fact the deepest entanglement in the forgottenness
of being (d. The interplay, 90, 91. From the first to the other beginning).
Moreover, the ensuing era, from the middle of the nineteenth
century on, does not even have knowledge of this effort of metaphysics.
It sinks instead into the mere technique characteristic of the
"theory of science" and in so doing appeals, not completely without
justification, to Plato.
Neo-Kantianism: affirmed by the philosophy of "life" and the philosophy
of "existence" ["Existenz"philosophie], because both (for example,
Dilthey, and equally Jaspers) utterly fail to surmise what
genuinely occurred in Western metaphysics and what must prepare
itself as the necessity of the other beginning.
213. What the question of truth is about
1. It is not about a mere modification of the concept,
2. nor about a more original insight into the essence.
3. Instead, it is about the leap into the essential occurrence of truth
268 V. The Grounding [338-339]
4. and consequently about a transformation of human being in the
sense of a dis-lodging of its position amid beings.
5. Therefore it is in the first place about a more originary appreciation
and empowering of beyng itself as event.
6. And so it is above all about the grounding of human being in Dasein
as the ground required by beyng itself for its own truth.
214. The essence of truth
(Openness)
Through recollection of the beginning (and thus of &:A~e£la) as well as
through meditation on the ground of the possibility of correctness
(adaequatio), we strike up against one and the same openness of the open
realm. Given thereby is, to be sure, only a first indication of the essence,
which is determined more essentially as the clearing for self-concealing.
Openness itself, quite apart from its mode of essential occurrence,
is already puzzling enough.
Openness: is that not (d. truth and abyssal ground) the emptiest of
the empty? So it seems, if we try to take it, so to speak, for itself in the
manner of a thing.
Yet the open realm, which conceals itself at the same time that
beings come to stand in it in each case (indeed not only the things
most proximately at hand), is in fact something like an inner recess
[hohle Mittel, e.g., that of a jug. Yet it must be recognized that the
inner recess is not just a haphazard emptiness which arises purely on
account of the surrounding walls and which happens not to be full
of "things." It is just the opposite: the inner recess itself is what determines,
shapes, and bears the walling action of the walls and of their
surfaces. The walls and surfaces are merely what is radiated out by
that original open realm which allows its openness to come into play
by summoning up, round about itself and toward itself, such-andsuch
walls (the particular form of the vessel). That is how the essential
occurrence of the open realm radiates back from and in the embracing
walls.
We must understand in a corresponding way, though as more essential
and richer, the essential occurrence of the openness of the
"there." The surrounding walling action of the "there" is of course
not an objectively present thing; indeed it is not a being, nor even all
beings. Instead, it pertains to being itself and is the trembling of the
event in the intimation of the self-concealing.
What is experienced in &:A~e£la, un-concealedness, is concealedness
along with its partial and occasional overcoming and elimination. Yet
§214 [339-340] 269
even this is not explicitly pursued and grounded, namely, the fact that
with the elimination (removal: alpha-privative), there must essentially
occur precisely that open realm in which everything unconcealed stands.
Or must we here consider the idea of light and illumination in their
relation to unconcealing, the latter taken as an apprehending and a
"seeing"? Certainly; d. the interpretation of the cave allegoryY Something
is shown by way of this allegory, and also the previous reference
to the jug is indeed an allegory. Do we then never get beyond the allegorical?
No and yes; for, conversely, the most sensuous language and
images are indeed never merely "sensuous" but are at first (not "superveniently")
something understood.
Precisely the fact that the "clearing" and the "cleared" were not
comprehended shows how little the guiding notion of light was able to
capture the open realm and its openness and elevate them to the level
of knowledge. This idea of light was taken instead in the direction of
beaming, fire, and sparks, whereby soon only a causal relation of illuminating
remained as prescriptive, until finally everything slid
down into the indeterminateness of "consciousness" and perceptio.
As little as the open realm and openness were pursued in their
manner of occurring essentially (something altogether different was
assigned earlier to the Greeks), just as little did the essential occurrence
of concealedness-concealing become clear and consign itself to the
basic experience. Even here the concealed became, in a typically
Greek way, the absent; the occurrence of concealment was lost, and
so was the necessity of explicitly grounding that occurrence, grasping
it fully in its intrinsic connection with the essential occurrence of
openness, and, ultimately and primarily, grounding this unitary occurrence
also as the most proper essence.
To attempt these things is to name and unfold Da-sein, which can
happen only by setting out from the "human being." Accordingly, the
first steps taken in the direction of the grounding of the Da-sein "of"
the human being, the Da-sein "in" the human being, and the human
being in Da-sein were bound to be very ambiguous and awkward, especially
if, as in the past, there is no will to grasp the developed questioning
out of itself, i.e., out of its basic aim (the truth of beyng), and if
every means is employed merely to reduce the decisive matter to the
previous condition, to explain it and thereby eliminate it.
The way of meditation on correctness and on its ground of possibility
is not immediately very convincing (d. the lecture on truth, 1930),
because it is difficult to discard the notion of the human being as a
18. Lecture course, Vom Wesen der Wahrheit: Zu Platons Hohlengleichnis und
Theatet, winter semester 1931-32 (GA34).
270 V. The Grounding [340-342]
thing (subject, person, etc.) and because all matters are construed as
"lived experiences" of a human being and these in turn as incidents
in that being.
Even this meditation can merely indicate that something necessary
is not yet grasped and possessed. This that is necessary (Da-sein)
can be attained only through a dislodging of human being as a whole,
i.e., through meditation on the plight with regard to being as such
and with regard to its truth.
215. The essential occurrence of truth
A decisive question: is the essential occurrence of truth, as clearing
for self-concealing, grounded on Da-sein, or is this, the essential occurrence
of truth, itself the ground for Da-sein? Or are both these
views valid? And what is meant in each case by "ground"?
These questions can be decided only if truth is grasped in the indicated
essence as the truth of beyng and thus grasped out of the event.
What does it mean to be placed before the self-concealing, the self-withholding,
the hesitating, and to remain constant in their open realm? It
means restraint and thus the basic disposition: shock, restraint, diffidence.
These come to a human being only if and when they are "bestowed."
216. The posing of the question of truth
seems completely arbitrary now, since this question has for a long
time not been a question at all. Yet this situation has the opposite
consequence: the posing of the question has its own unique determinateness
within the plight which is so deeply rooted that it is not a
plight for anyone, in the sense that we do not experience and grasp
the question of the truth of what is true as a necessary question.
Instead, the ever-greater uprootedness drives us into a blatant capitulation
to common opinion or into indifference or meek dependence
on the past.
217. The essence of truth
Most intrinsically proper to this essence is the fact that it is historical.
The history of truth, the history of the shining forth, transforming,
and grounding of its essence, contains only rare and widely separated
moments.
§217 [342-343J 271
For long periods of time, this essence seems congealed (d. the
lengthy history of truth as correctness: OjlOlw(ju;, adaequatio), because
what is sought and pursued is only the true that is determined by this
essence. And so, on account of this unchallenged constancy, there
arises the semblant "eternity" of the essence of truth, especially if
"eternity" is taken as mere continuance.
Are we standing at the end of one such lengthy era of the congealing
of the essence of truth and thus before the door of a new moment
of its hidden history?
That a clearing might ground what is self-concealing-that is the
meaning of the dictum that truth is primarily clearing-concealment (d.
the abyss). The self-concealing of beyng in the clearing of the "there."
Beyng essentially occurs in self-concealing. The event never lies open
and manifest like a being, like something present (d. The leap, beyng).
The appropriating eventuation in its turning is exclusively contained
neither in the call nor in the belonging; it is in neither of these
and yet these come to be in the oscillation of the appropriating eventuation,
and the trembling of this oscillation in the turning of the
event is the most concealed essence of beyng. This concealment requires
the deepest clearing. Beyng "needs" Da-sein.
Truth never "is"; instead, it essentially occurs. For truth is the
truth of beyng, and beyng "only" essentially occurs. Thus what essentially
occurs is also everything that belongs to truth, including
time-space and consequently "space" and "time."
The "there" occurs essentially, and as occurring essentially it must
at the same time be assumed in a mode of being: Da-sein. Hence the
steadfast withstanding of the essential occurrence of the truth of
beyng. This conflictual duality the riddle. Therefore Da-sein the "between"-
between beyng and beings (d. The grounding, 227. On the
essence of truth, no. 13, p. 280).
Because this essence is historical (d. p. 270L), afortiori every "truth"
(in the sense of what is true) is historically something true only if it
has previously regrown into a ground and has thereby become at the
same time a power that has an impact on what lies ahead.
Where truth is veiled in the form of "reason" and the "rational," its
distortion is at work, that destructive force of the "valid for all" whereby
everyone is arbitrarily placed in the right and the pleasure arises that
no one may exceed anyone else with respect to something essential.
This "magic" of universal validity is what has secured the predominance
of the interpretation of truth as correctness and has made
it nearly unshakable.
That is evident, finally, in the fact that even where something of the
historical essence of truth has supposedly been grasped, all that has
272 V. The Grounding [343-344]
resulted is a superficial "historicism" which maintains that truth is not
valid eternally but only "for a time." This opinion, however, is merely a
"quantitative" restriction of the universal validity and, in order to become
such, needs to presuppose that truth is correctness and validity.
The superficiality of this "thinking" is only exacerbated when eventually
the attempt is made to bring both of these into balance, the
eternal validity in itself and the temporally restricted one.
218. The indication a/the essential occurrence a/truth
Truth is the clearing for concealment: that merely indicates its essential
occurrence, through the naming of its essence. At the same
time, however, this naming is supposed to indicate that the interpretation
of the essential occurrence of truth recalls aA~ee:la, not the
mere literal translation, in whose domain the traditional conception
is evoked once again, but aA~ee:ta as the name for the first shining
forth of truth itself and indeed necessarily in unity with the inceptual
naming of beings as cpUCHC;.
Yet the indication of the essence has to involve knowledge that the
clearing for concealment must develop just as much with respect to
time-space (abyss) as with respect to the strife and the sheltering.
219. The conjuncture a/the question a/truth
Truth is what is originarily true.
What is true is what is most eminently.
More eminently than any being is beyng itself. What is most eminently
"is" no longer but, instead, essentially occurs as the essential
occurrence itself (event).
Beyng essentially occurs as event.
The essence of truth is the clearing-concealment of the event.
The clearing-concealment essentially occurs as the grounding of
Da-sein; but grounding ambiguous.
The grounding of Da-sein takes place as a sheltering of the truth
in what is true, which thus first comes to be.
What is true lets a being be a being.
If beings in this way stand in the "there," they become representable.
The possibility and necessity of correctness is thereby grounded.
Correctness is an ineluctable scion of truth.
Where correctness thereby predetermines the "idea" of truth, all
paths to the origin of truth are blocked.
§221 [345-346] 273
220. The question of truth
Just as the conjunction of the question of truth is joined, this joining
remains a way in which we are at the disposal of the history of being,
provided we still have the power to maintain ourselves in the stream
of that history.
The question of truth in the delineated sense, and only in that
sense, is for us the precursory question we must traverse first of all.
Only in this way is grounded a domain of decision for the essential
meditations. (Cf. the separate elaboration, in an orientation toward
time-space, of the question of truth as the precursory question.)
The question of truth is the question of the essential occurrence of
truth. Truth itself is that wherein what is true has its ground.
Ground here: 1. that in which sheltered and retained;
2. that by which compelled;
3. that by which pervaded.
What is true: what stands in the truth and so becomes a being or a
nonbeing.
Truth: the clearing for concealment (truth as un-truth), in itself
conflictual, and permeated with negativity, and
the original intimacy (d. The grounding and the
Frankfurt LecturesI9). All this because
Truth: truth of beyng as event.
What is true and to be what is true: with it at the same time what is
untrue, the distorted and its variations.
The essential occurrence of truth.
221. Truth as the essential occurrence ofbeyng20
Truth: the clearing for self-concealing (Le., the event; hesitant selfwithholding
as ripeness, fruit, bestowal). Truth, however, not simply
clearing but precisely clearing for self-concealing.
Beyng: the event, permeated with negativity in the oscillation and
so in strife. The origin of the strife: beyng or not-being.
Truth: ground as abyss. Ground not the whence, but the "in which"
as what belongs. Abyss: as time-space of the strife; the strife as the one
between earth and world, because the relation of truth to beings!
19. "Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes." In Holzwege (GA5).
20. Cf. Prospect, 9. Conspectus.
274 V. The Grounding [346-347]
The first (inceptual) sheltering, the question and decision. The question
of truth (meditation), to place the essence of truth up for decision.
Origin and necessity of the decision (and of the question). The
question: must we (essentially) question? If so, then why? The question
and belief
222. Truth
Only if we are standing in the clearing do we experience the
self -concealing.
Truth is never a propositionally integrated "system" to which appeal
could be made.
Truth is the ground as one that retains and penetrates and that
protrudes above the concealed without annulling it, the attuning
disposition that disposes as this ground. For this ground is the event
itself as the essential occurrence of beyng.
The event bears truth = truth protrudes through the event.
The question of truth
The question of truth sounds very pretentious and makes it seem that
the questioner, despite posing the question, already knows what it
means to be true.
Nevertheless, this questioning is not a mere prelude for the sake of
presenting something unquestionable as something that had been
attained. Questioning is here the beginning and the end.
"Truth" is meant as the question-worthy essence of what is true,
something very tentative and extrinsic for anyone who wants to
grasp and possess what is true as quickly as possible.
If there is to be a way out of this situation, then philosophy will
have to mask the question of truth in another question, one that
sounds different and seems harmless, to avoid every semblance of
promising some great proclamations.
223. The essence of truth
(the distorted essence of truth)
If truth essentially occurs as the clearing for that which is self-concealing,
and if, in accord with the negativity of being, the distorted essence
belongs intrinsically to the essence, then must not the perversion of
the essence spread itself out into its distortion? In other words, must
not the dissembling of the clearing, as semblance of the essence, and
§225 [347-348] 275
thereby this dissembling itself be driven to the extreme externalization,
to the most superficial state, and become mere spectacle, mere
playacting? Theater-the structuring of reality as the work of the set
designer!
If from time to time the theatrical comes to power, what does that
then say about the essence? Must it not therefore, as a ground,
ground in concealedness and stillness, to such an extent that it is
scarcely known? But how is it then still a ground? If seen in general?
But is not the essence of being the uniqueness and infrequency of the
alienation? The proper distorted essence of truth is designated in the
lecture on truth as errancy. This determination still more original in
the occurrence of the negativity of the "there."
On the other hand, the highest distorted essence indeed precisely
in the semblance provided by spectacle.
Double meaning of distorted essence [Un-wesen].
224. The essence of truth
How paltry is our knowledge of the gods, and yet how essential is
their essential occurrence, and their withering, in the openness of
the concealments of the "there," i.e., in the truth!
What must the experience of the essence of truth itself then say to
us about the event? Indeed, how can we properly bear silence in this
that is said?
What is true first is the truth (precisely as clearing-concealing) of
beyng. The essence of truth resides in its essential occurrence as what
is true of beyng and thus in its becoming the origin of the sheltering
of what is true in beings, whereby these latter first become beings.
The precursory question of truth is simultaneously the basic question
of beyng; and beyng qua event essentially occurs as truth.
225. The essence of truth
is the clearing for self-concealing. This intimately conflictual essence of
truth shows that truth is originally and essentially the truth of beyng
(event).
Yet the question remains as to whether we experience this essence
of truth essentially enough, whether, in every relation to beings, we
take up and consign ourselves to that self-concealing and thus to the
hesitant withholding, as ap-propriation in its own respective way.
Consigning only such that we procure, produce, create, and look after
276 V. The Grounding [349-350J
beings themselves and allow them to take effect in each case according
to their own proper behest, in order that thereby the clearing may be
grounded and not become an emptiness in which everything simply
presents itself as equally easy to "understand" and master.
The self-concealing protrudes through the clearing, and only if
that happens, i.e., only if the conflictual in its intimacy reigns
throughout the "there," can the dislodgment from the indeterminate
(and, as such, not at all grasped) domain of representation and lived
experience succeed and can steadfastness in Da-sein be attempted.
Only if self-concealing reigns throughout all realms of production,
creation, action, and sacrifice by weaving them together in essential
occurrence, and if self-concealing determines the clearing and thus at
the same time essentially occurs by encountering what secludes itself
within the clearing, only then does world arise and at the same time
(out of the "simultaneity" of beyng and beings) the earth springs up.
Now for a moment there is history.
Therefore truth is never merely clearing; it essentially occurs as
concealment just as originarily and intimately along with the clearing.
These, clearing and concealment are not two; instead, they constitute
the essential occurrence of the one truth itself. Inasmuch as truth essentially
occurs, comes to be, the event becomes truth. The event eventuates,
which means nothing else but that it and only it becomes truth,
becomes that which belongs to the event, so that truth is precisely and
essentially the truth of beyng.
Every questioning of truth that does not think so far in advance
does not think far enough in advance.
Even that very different, medieval interpretation of verum as a determination
of ens (beings), an interpretation which moves in the
domain of the guiding question (metaphysics) and is in addition uprooted
from its most proximate Greek soil, is still a semblance of this
intimacy between truth and beyng. All the same, this questioning of
the event should not be confused with that quite distinct relation
between beings (ens) and representedness in the intellectus divinus, a
relation which is built entirely on the ground of truth as the correctness
of representation (intellectus) and which can be valid at all only
under the presupposition that omne ens (Deus creator excepted) is ens
creatum. At the same time, seen "ontologically," even Deus is grasped
here on the basis of creatio, whereby it is manifest that this sort of
"philosophy" takes its orientation from the account of creation in the
Old Testament. Insight into this nexus, however, is all the more essential
inasmuch as such a nexus is still maintained ubiquitously in
modern metaphysics, even where the medieval directedness toward
the "deposit of faith" of the Church has been abandoned long ago as
§226 [350-351] 277
a matter of principle. It is precisely the highly varied predominance
of "Christian" thinking in the post-Christian and anti-Christian eras
that hinders every attempt to break away from this soil and to think
the fundamental relation between beyng and truth primordially, i.e.,
on the basis of a more original experience.
226. 'AMena and the clearing of concealment
'A-A~eEla means un-concealment and the un-concealed itself, which
already indicates that concealment itself is experienced only as what
is to be cleared away, what is to be removed (a-).
Therefore questioning, too, does not address the concealment itself
and its ground; and therefore also, conversely, the unconcealed as
such is all that is essential, not the process of unconcealing and certainly
not this as the clearing in which the concealment itself now actually
comes into the open. Nevertheless, the concealment is not thereby
canceled but first becomes graspable in its essence.
Truth as the clearing for concealment is thus an essentially different
projection than is aA~ena, although the former projection pertains to
the recollection of the latter, and vice versa (d. p. 278).
The clearing for concealment, as an originary-unitary essence, is the
abyss of the ground, and as this abyss the "there" essentially occurs.
The seductive turn of phrase "truth is un-truth" is so prone to be
misunderstood that it cannot reliably point out the right path. Yet it
should still indicate the strangeness residing in the new projection of
the essence-the clearing for concealment, and this as what essentially
occurs in the event.
Which steadfast restraint of Da-sein is thereby claimed in order of
rank if this essence of truth is to be brought to knowledge as what is
originarily true?
Only now can we also see more clearly the origin of errancy and
the power and possibility of the abandonment by being, the concealment
and the dissembling; the dominance of the distorted ground.
The mere reference to aA~ena does not much help explain the essence
of truth which is placed at the ground here, because in aMena
the occurrence of unconcealment and concealment is precisely not
experienced and not grasped as the ground, for the questioning is
indeed still determined on the basis of CPU(}l<;, beings as beings.
But it is otherwise with regard to the clearing for concealment.
Here we stand in the essential occurrence of truth, and this is the truth of
beyng. The clearing for concealment is already the movement of the
oscillation in the turning of the event.
278 V. The Grounding [351-353]
*
The previous attempts, in Being and Time and the ensuing writings, to
implement this essence of truth (in opposition to correctness in representing
and asserting) as the ground of Da-sein itself had to remain
insufficient. For they were always carried out as a rejection and so
always took their orientation from that which they rejected. Thus
they made it impossible to know the essence of truth in a radical way,
i.e., from the ground (and the essence itself essentially occurs as that
ground). For such knowledge to succeed, saying of the essence of
beyng must no longer be withheld due to the mistaken opinion that,
despite insight into the necessity of a projection which leaps ahead,
ultimately there still could be built a way to the truth of beyng that
would proceed step by step from the earlier views. The attempt to
build such a way must always fail.
As strong as may be the new danger that the event will immediately
become a mere name and a pliant concept from which almost
anything might be "deduced," we must nevertheless speak of it,
though not in a detached way within a "speculative" discussion. Instead,
we must speak of the event in a meditation compelled throughout
by the plight of the abandonment by being.
*
The clearing of concealment does not mean the sublation [Aufhebung]
of the concealed, i.e., its liberation and transformation into unconcealment.
It instead means precisely the grounding of the abyssal ground
for the concealment (the hesitant withholding).
In my previous attempts at projecting this essence of truth, the
endeavor to be understood was always primarily directed at an elucidation
of the modes of clearing, the variations of concealment, and
their essential interconnections (d., e.g., the lecture on truth, 1930).
With regard to determinations such as "Da-sein is simultaneously in
the truth and in the untruth," they were at once taken in terms of morals
and worldviews, and what is decisive in this philosophical meditation,
namely, the essential occurrence of the "simultaneously" as the
basic essence of truth, was not grasped, nor was untruth grasped originarily
in the sense of concealment (rather than some sort of falsehood).
*
What does it mean to "stand" in the clearing of concealment and to
withstand it? The basic disposition of restraint. The extraordinarily historical
non-repeatability of this steadfastness, that here first, and here alone,
a decision is made about "what is true." Which sort of constancy is
[353-354] 279
involved in this steadfastness? Or, to ask the question in a different
way: who is able to be Da-sein, and when and how?
What can the inceptual meditation of thoughtful saying accomplish
toward the preparation of this being [Sein]?
Why must the impetus be provided at this moment by this "now,"
i.e., by a knowledge that questions?
To what extent is the already precedent poet H6lderlin, in his work
and most unique poetic domain, our necessity only now?
227. On the essence oftruth21
1. Does truth essentially occur? Why? Because only thus the essential
occurrence of beyng. Why beyng?
2. The essence of truth grounds the necessity of the why and thus
the necessity of questioning.
The question of truth arises for the sake of beyng, which needs
our belonging as ones that ground Dasein.
3. The first question (1) is in itself the determination of the essence
of truth.
4. How the question of truth is to be set up.
Starting with the essential ambiguity: "truth" meant as "what is
true"; but what is true is truth as the clearing-concealment of the
event.
At the beginning, this clearing an illumination, but without
luster and radiance. Concealment itself all the brighter, shining
through the depths of concealedness.
5. How the concept of truth as correctness, a concept with a long
tradition, not only guides the question at first but also suggests
that the answer to the question must be measured by the standard
of correctness and that the essence of truth can thus be read
off from something pregiven which renders the essence.
6. To unfold truth in its essence primarily as clearing concealment
(distortion and veiling).
7. Truth as the ground of time-space, but therefore also first determinable
in its essence on the basis of time-space.
8. Time-space as the site of the moment out of the turning in the
event.
9. Truth and necessity of sheltering.
10. Sheltering as the playing out of the strife between world and earth.
21. Cf. lecture, "Vom Wesen der Wahrheit," 1930; Anmerkungen zu "Sein und
Zeit" §44.
280 V. The Grounding [354-355]
II. The historically necessary paths of sheltering.
12. How, in sheltering, beings first become beings (ct. The leap, 152.
The levels of beyng).
13. How, in meditatively traversing the foregoing way, there is unfolded
the domain in which occurs the "difference" between
beyng and beings, i.e., the domain which occurs as this difference
(ct. The leap, 151. Being and beings). Da-sein essentially occurring
as the "between."
*
In view of the ever-greater desolation and disfigurement of philosophy,
something lastingly essential would already be won if the posing
of the question of truth were achieved out of the necessity of the
question and in the right way.
The necessity of this question arises out of the plight of the abandonment
by being. The right way of posing the question is the transi·
tion to the originary essence through a clarification of the starting point,
the dominant concept of correctness. At the same time, it must be
grasped that along with truth what is determined in the turning is also
the truth of the essence and of the essential occurrence. From the very
beginning, therefore, we cannot strive for and demand a concept of
"essence" in the sense of a genus, i.e., a correct synthesis of universal
properties available immediately to everyone. Instead, what needs to
be striven for and demanded is something higher, by which the already
long-dominant uprootedness of the question of truth can at
once be measured. In these terms, i.e., experienced in its necessity and
historicality, truth is the dislodging into transposedness.
It is essentially a matter of the dominance of correctness that this
transposedness is in a certain way always occurring, ever since the
human being was and is historical, and that nevertheless the transposition
remains hidden. In accord with the dominance of correctness, 11Umans
find themselves involved immediately and only in an opposition
(1jJux~-avnKd]l£vov ["soul-what is opposed to it"], cogito-cogitatum,
consciousness-object of consciousness). Out of this opposition, humans
take and expect the fulfillment of their claims. In this opposition
plays out everything of which humans believe themselves knowledgeable.
Therein also belongs the dominance of "transcendence" (d. The interplay,
llO. The ibeu, Platonism, and idealism).
Here lies the deepest ground for the hiddenness and distortedness
of Da-sein. For, despite all the antagonism against the "I," what is
more clear and unquestionable than the fact that ''I'' and "we" are over
and against objects? Thereby "I" and "we" are primarily what is unquestioned
and what can be left serenely in the background.
§229 [355-356] 281
Therefore no one ventures to pursue the meditation far enough,
even within this basic position, so as to see that we "have" nothing
more "given" which could be what is true by way of rendering and
forming an image.
Even if only this much would be conceded, the question would already
have to arise as to whether correctness (which has first grounded,
and not presupposed, such a representation of beings and even of the
one who does the representing), as the essence of truth, can at all
ground and determine the search for what is true and the claim to it.
Furthermore, such a correctness would never lead out of the plight
of the abandonment by being; it would only corroborate and call up
the plight anew, in a veiling way.
But what does it mean that the essential projection of truth as
clearing concealment must now be ventured and the dislodging of the
human being into Da-sein prepared?
Dis-lodged out of that situation in which we find ourselves: in the
gigantic emptiness and desolation, compelled into the tradition (which
has become unrecognizable as such) without standards and above all
without the will to interrogate them. The desolation, however, the
concealed abandonment by being.
228. The essence a/truth is un-truth22
This statement, deliberately formulated to be in conflict with itself, is
supposed to express the fact that the negative belongs intrinsically to
truth, by no means as a sheer lack but as resistance, as that selfconcealing
which comes into the clearing as such.
Thereby the original relation of truth to beyng as event is grasped.
Nevertheless, the statement is precarious with regard to the aim of
using such strangeness to bring the strange essence of truth nearer.
If grasped quite originarily, there lies in the statement the most
essential insight into-and simultaneously a reference toward-the
intimacy and strife in beyng itself as event.
229. Truth and Da-sein
The clearing for self-concealing clears in the projection. The projecting
of the projection occurs as Da-sein, and the projector of this projecting
22. Cf. Frankfurt lectures, "Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes." In Holzwege. p.
36ft., esp. p. 40f. (GAS).
282 V. The Grounding [356-358]
is in each case that being-a-self in which the human being becomes
steadfast.
Every projection places back in relation to the projector that which
is set into the clearing of the projection and is thereby first set free.
And the converse also holds: the projector first becomes himself by
taking over that incorporating relation.
What is set into the projection is never something utterly in itself,
nor can the projector ever posit himself purely for himself. Instead,
this strife (the fact that each counterpart turns toward the other in
relating back and incorporating) is a consequence of the intimacy that
essentially occurs in the essence of truth as the clearing of what is selfconcealing.
A mere extrinsic dialectic of the subject-object relation
does not capture anything here. Rather, this relation itself, grounded
on correctness as a scion of truth, originates out of the essence of truth.
To be sure, this origin of the strife and the strife itself must now be
demonstrated. That requires more than simply pondering the clearing
and the way it is founded through the projection. Instead, we
must recognize above all that the clearing brings what is self-concealing
into the open and allows the selfhood of the projector to be pervasively
attuned by the captivation which, as determining, arises out of
the openness. Only in that way does there occur in each case the
consigning appropriation to being and, in this consignment, the assignment
to the projector himself, whereby he for his part first comes
to stand in the clearing (of what is self-concealing) and becomes
steadfast in the "there."
The more essentially beyng belongs to Da-sein and vice versa, the
more originarily do these turn toward each other in not letting themselves
be free of each other.
The projector must take over the incorporating relation, and
thereby the thrownness first comes to bear fruit, inasmuch as we see
that the projector himself belongs to what is opened up in the clearing
and to what is thereby brought into the open.
230. Truth and correctness
The priority of correctness establishes and makes self-evident the claim
to explanation in the sense of a derivation of beings as possible productions
of other beings ("mathesis," "mechanics" understood as broadly
as possible).
When such explanation breaks down, appeal is made to the inexplicable,
or else it is maintained consistently that what cannot be explained
is not a being.
§232 [358-359] 283
The inexplicable ("transcendent") is in this way, however, merely
an offspring of the craving for explanation and, instead of being
something higher, is actually abasement itself.
Yet the concealed ground of this whole pursuit lies in the priority
and claim of correctness, and this priority derives from an incapacity
for the essence of truth itself, Le., an incapacity for knowledge of that
which bears or perhaps hinders every effort, no matter how honest,
to grasp what is true.
231. How truth, aA~ee:ta, becomes correctness
Truth, aA~ee:ta:, scarcely sounds forth when it becomes correctness;
indeed, truth remains powerful, but it is ungrounded and also not
genuinely grounding.
Correctness gives priority to the ¢UX~ and then to the subject-object
relation. The dominance of correctness already has its long history; therefore
its provenance and the possibility of an alternative can be brought to
sight only slowly and with difficulty. The concept of ¢UX~ already implies
A.6yoc,: originally as gathering and then as speech and saying.
That the assertion becomes the locus of "truth" is one of the strangest
occurrences in the history of truth, although for us it seems perfectly
ordinary.
Therefore the most difficult task, apart from grasping the essential
occurrence itself, is to seek and preserve, in an originary way and
where we do not at all suspect them, truth and what is true.
This uprooting of truth is accompanied by the veiling of the essence
of beyng.
To what extent is "correctness" essential with respect to instituting
and sheltering (Le., with respect to language)?
232. The question of truth as historical meditation
That is not to be taken in the sense of a historiological report on the
opinions and theories which have been put forward with regard to
the "concept" of truth.
Philosophy in the other beginning is essentially historical, and in
that respect a more originary kind of recollection of the history of
the first beginning must also arise now.
The question is: which basic movements of the essence of truth, and
of the interpretative conditions of truth, have borne Western history
and will bear that history?
284 V. The Grounding [359-360]
The two preeminent basic positions in Western history are marked
by Plato and Nietzsche.
Plato: specifically (d. the interpretation of the cave allegory23) as
that thinker in whom a last glimmer of aA~e£la becomes still clear in
its transition to truth as located in assertions (d. also Aristotle, Metaphysics
e IV).
Nietzsche: with him the Western tradition is gathered into the
modern and, above all, positivistic transformation of the nineteenth
century and at the same time "truth" is brought into essential opposition-
and thereby into intrinsic connection-to art, with both
truth and art as basic modes of the will to power as the essence (essentia)
of beings. Their existentia is called the eternal recurrence of the
same.
233. Incorporating the interpretation of the cave allegory
(1931-32,1933-34) into the question of truth
1. Why this interpretation historically essential? Because a fully developed
meditation here shows how aA~e£la still essentially bore
up and guided the Greek questioning of QV, while, at the same time,
precisely this questioning and its introduction of the ibea brought
about the collapse of aA~e£la.
2. Further meditation shows that this collapse is not that of something
firmly instituted and is certainly not the collapse of something
explicitly grounded. Inceptual Greek thinking accomplished
neither this instituting or grounding, despite the aphorism of Heraclitus
on nOA£llo<; and the didactic poem of Parmenides. Yet
aA~e£la was essential throughout thinking and poetizing (tragedy
and Pindar).
3. Only if this is experienced and expounded can it be shown how
then a remnant and semblance of aA~e£la must in a certain sense
be maintained by necessity, since indeed even truth as correctness,
and precisely this, must be sheltered in an already open
realm (d. what was said about correctness). That toward which
the representation is directed must be open, and so must that
whose adequation is supposed to become manifest (d. correctness
and the subject-object relation; Da-sein and representation).
4. If we look backward and forward over the history of aA~e£la, proceeding
from the cave allegory, which occupies such a key
23. Lecture course, Yom Wesen der Wahrheit: Zu Platons Hohlengleichnis und
Theatet, winter semester 1931-32 (GA34).
§234 [360-361] 285
position, then we can indirectly fathom what it means to establish
truth as aA~eEta: for the first time in thought, to unfold and ground
it in its essence. The fact that this not only did not but could not
occur in all of previous metaphysics or even in the first
beginning.
5. The grounding of the essence of truth as an uncovering of its first
glimmering in aA~eEta: is then not simply an appropriation of the
word and of its fitting translation, "unconcealedness." Instead,
what is required is an experience of the essence of truth as clearing
for self-concealing.
The clearing concealment must ground itself as Da-sein.
The self-concealing must come into knowledge as the essential
occurrence of beyng itself as event.
In its turning, the most intimate relation between beyng and
Dasein becomes visible as that which compels the basic question
and makes it obligatory to go beyond the guiding question and
thereby beyond all metaphysics, actually beyond and into the temporality-
spatiality of the "there."
6. In accord with its long history and confused tradition in which
various factors have intersected, "truth" itself and its concept are
now no longer questioned in any clear and necessary way. Consequently,
even the interpretations of the history of the concept of
truth, and the interpretations of the cave allegory in particular,
are paltry and are dependent on what was itself derived earlier
from Platonism and from the doctrine of judgment. The basic positions
are lacking for a projection of what is said in the cave allegory
and of what is involved in that saying.
Therefore, it is necessary to layout, first of all and for the first
time, an interpretation of the cave allegory which is complete and
is rooted in the question of truth. Furthermore, that interpretation
must be made effective as an introduction to the domain of
the question of truth and as a guide to the necessity of that question.
Of course, reservations are attached to such an immediate
attempt, since the ground and line of sight for the projection of the
interpretation and of its steps remain presupposed and will appear
violent and arbitrary as long as they are left undiscussed.
234. The question of truth (Nietzsche)
The last one who asked the question of "truth," and asked about it most
paSSionately, is Nietzsche. On the one hand, he proceeds from the fact
286 V. The Grounding [361-363]
that "we do not possess the truth,"24 and, on the other, he does ask
what truth is, indeed even what it is worth.25
Yet Nietzsche does not ask the question of truth in an originary
way. The word "truth" almost always means to him "what is true,"
and when he asks about the essence of what is true he does so while
ensnared in the tradition and not from an originary meditation such
that this meditation would at the same time be grasped as bearing
the essential decision regarding "what is true."
Admittedly, a more originary questioning never guarantees a more
certain answer but only, on the contrary, a higher question-worthiness
of the essence of truth. We need this question-worthiness; without it,
what is true remains a matter of indifference.
Nietzsche's meditations on "truth," however, do not enter the open
realm, because:
1. Nietzsche relates truth to "life" (in the "biologistic" -idealistic
sense) as something that serves to assure the continuance of the
living being. "Life" is posited simply as a basic actuality, and the
general characteristic of becoming is attributed to it.
2. At the same time, however, Nietzsche grasps "being," entirely in
the sense of the oldest Platonic tradition, as the "constant." As this
and seen on the basis of life and related back to it, "being" is the
firmly established and thus is in each case "what is true."
3. Furthermore, this concept of truth, oriented toward "life" and determined
by the traditional concept of being, is situated fully on
the path of the tradition, inasmuch as truth is a determination as
well as a result of thought and representation. This usual view of
truth goes back to Aristotle.
All this, taken over without question, impedes an originary questioning
of the essence of truth.
To be sure, inasmuch as the question of truth stands at the center
of Nietzsche's last meditations (d. his proposition about the relation
between truth-cognitive truth-and art, and d. his teaching of the
perspectives of the drives), everything acquires a new vitality, which
must not blind us to the fragility of the groundwork, however, especially
if we consider that Nietzsche in his own way indeed wants to
overcome Platonism.
24. F. Nietzsche, "Nachgelassene Werke: Unveroffentlichtes aus der Zeit des
Menschlichen, Allzumenschlichen und der Morgenrothe" (1975-76, 1880-81),
in Nietzsche's Werke (GroJSoktavausgabe), Leipzig: Kroner, 1919, Bd. XI, p.
159.-Ed.
25. F. Nietzsche, "Zur Genealogie der Moral," in Nietzsche's Werke (GroJSoktavausgabe),
Stuttgart: Kroner, 1921, Bd. VII, p. 471.-Ed.
§234 [363-364] 287
It certainly does appear that Nietzsche, in spite of everything, has
incorporated also the essence of truth back into "life." But did he gain
clarity about the truth regarding this postulation of "life" and thus of
the will to power and of the eternal recurrence of the same? In his
own way, very much so; for he understands these projections of beings
as experiments we make with "truth." This philosophy is supposed to
help assure the continuance of "life" as such, indeed precisely by liberating
"life" in its unsurpassable possibilities. Here Nietzsche's thinking
probably takes a step whose extent we still cannot judge, because we
are too close to him and are therefore compelled to see everything still
too exclusively in that particular horizon (the one of "life") which
Nietzsche ultimately wanted to overcome. It thus becomes a matter of
even greater necessity for us to question more originarily and thus
precisely not fall victim to the erroneous view that Nietzsche's own
questioning is thereby "done for."
What is made very difficult and almost impossible by Nietzsche's
most proper thinking is the insight that the essential occurrence of
truth means Da-sein, i.e., standing in the midst of the clearing of what
is self-concealing and drawing thence the ground and power of being
human. For, despite the evocations of "perspectivism," "truth" remains
rolled up in "life," with life itself taken, almost in the manner of
a thing, as a center of will and of power which wills its own enhancement
and surmounting.
That transported standing out into the unknown, which certainly
was a basic experience for Nietzsche, could not, if my view is correct,
become the grounded core of his questioning, because the tradition held
him ensnared in the three-fold way mentioned above (p. 286).
Accordingly, Nietzsche was not at first grasped on the basis of the
most hidden volition of his thinking and for a long time to come will
not be grasped in that way. Instead, he is placed within the usual
horizons of the dominant thinking and the worldviews of the nineteenth
century, so that by being set off in relief against them, and
thus with their help, what is proper to Nietzsche and "new" with him
can be found and made useful.
The way the confrontation with Nietzsche does master and does
not master his conception of "truth" must become a cornerstone for
the decision as to whether we are helping his genuine philosophy to
its future (without becoming "Nietzscheans") or are simply pigeonholing
it in the manner of "historiology."
Nietzsche seems to inquire deepest into the essence of truth when he
asks, "What is the meaning of all will to truth?" and when he calls
288 V. The Grounding [364-365]
knowledge of this question "our problem" (VII, 482).26 His solution: will
to truth is will to semblance, and this necessarily as a will to power, to
assuring the continuance of life, and this will is at its highest in art,
whereby art is of more value than truth. The will to "truth" is thus ambiguous:
as making things fixed and settled, it is a will that runs counter
to life; as a will to semblance (qua transfiguration), it is an enhancement
of life. What does this will want with us-that is Nietzsche's question.
Yet even this question and this knowledge of it are not originary
(setting aside completely the postulation of "life" and of the interpretation
of "being"). For, what truth is is taken by Nietzsche as something
settled, and he takes his interpretation of its essence (d. p.
286f.) as something sufficiently grounded, such that he can at once
take up the question that is apparently more acute and more originary
(because related to "will to power").
Yet, what is truth? Above all, how do we know what truth is?
Does not the question of what is truth already presuppose truth?
What kind of presup-position is that, and how do we bring it in?
For Nietzsche, truth is a condition of life, one which is itself against
life. Accordingly, life requires this opponent. (What is announced
here? Is it the relation to "beings" as such, a relation not experienced
out of its ground, not brought into the open realm, and not based on
representation and thinking?)
Because "life" is already the reality in the sense of the most equivocal
idealism, one which has entrusted itself to positivism, truth
must be postulated in advance and, as a mere condition, incorporated
into life. All that remains, therefore, as the ultimate and apparently
original question is the question of the "value" of truth: in what
sense is truth a condition of "life" -as debasing it, quieting it, helping
to assure it, or actually enhancing it?
Yet how does the measure of the "value" of something for life
arise? Does life itself require decisions with regard to its conditions?
Which life? If it does require decisions, then the question is how the
conditions themselves, and the decisions about them, belong to "life."
What does "life" then mean?
If the will to power is the will to self-surpassing and in that way a
coming to oneself, then truth (admittedly not understood in Nietzsche's
sense) proves to be the condition of the will to power. The self-surpassing,
if it is an opening and grounding and not a mere quantitative increase,
requires the openness of time-space.
Seen in this way, truth, as will to truth, is not simply one condition
of life but is the ground of its essentia as will to power.
26. Ibid., p. 482.-Ed.
§235 [365-367] 289
Of course, the entire ambiguity of "life" shows itself here, and the
question remains as to whether and how a ranking can be postulated
in this regard, e.g., along the lines of the Leibnizian monadology.
235. Truth and genuineness27
We call true gold genuine gold and a genuine German a true one. The
genuine is what corresponds to and satisfies the true, and the true is
meant here in the sense of the actual or, as the case may be, the suitable.
Genuineness therefore implies correspondence and, accordingly,
correctness.
Yet the genuine is not purely and simply what "agrees" with the
suitable; it by no means merely pertains to propositions. A proposition
is correct but is not genuine; or is it indeed? An ungenuine proposition,
an apocryphal one that does not derive, e.g., from Aristotle
himself, can still be correct; conversely, an incorrect one can be genuine.
Thus genuineness signifies something other than correctness, if
this latter term is to be reserved for the cor-respondence of a pronouncement
to the thing spoken of.
Genuine, on the other hand, is a piece of gold, for example. We
speak of a "genuine Durer" but also of a "genuinely" Schillerian turn
of phrase. In these cases, "genuine" means something else again, not
simply "unfalsified" and deriving only from Durer or Schiller but,
rather, precisely accordant with the one or the other and only with
him, essentially characteristic. Likewise, we speak of genuineness when
we call people "genuine" in their behavior.
The genuine is not only the suitable and the accordant, thus what
corresponds to an already extant thing, but at the same time: accordant
in the establishment of a measure, genuine in the unfolding,
faithful to the origin, maintaining the originariness.
What is this "originariness"? What does it determine? The human
being, being human! (Steadfastness of Da-sein!)
Genuineness is also more essential than honesty. Honesty always
concerns merely the unfolding of something already given and already
available (d. the genuine and the straightforward and the simple).
Genuineness: the power for creatively preserving what is bestowed,
the power for creatively carrying out what is assigned. Genuineness
of temperament, of courage, of attuned, knowing, persistent will.
Essential patience as the highest courage.
Genuineness and restraint; the latter still more original.
27. genuine [echtj; legitimate [ehaftj-legal, filius legitim us; "marriage" ["Ehe"j
290 V. The Grounding [367-368]
236. Truth
Why is there truth? Is there indeed truth? How? If truth were not, on
what would stand even the mere possibility of the "why"? Does the
why-question already confirm the fact that there is truth, that truth
must be in some way or other? Questioning as seeking the ground out
of which and on which truth is supposed to be. Whence this questioning?
Is it not based on a bursting forth of human beings into an open
realm which opens itself so as to conceal? And is not this, the clearingconcealment,
the essence of truth? But whence and how does there
take place the bursting forth of human beings into that "other" which
they take themselves to be, which appears to humans as their domain,
but which they themselves actually are not, which is instead debarred
and disguised to humans and of which only a semblance remains to
them (Da-sein)?
The determination of the essence of truth as clearing-concealment-
on what is that grounded? On a clue given by aA~8Eta. But
who has ever thought through aA~8na in a determining way, and
whence the rights to aM8na as something handed down and yet at
the same time forgotten? How do we gain a stance in the essence of
truth? Without this stance, everything "true" is a mere fraud. Nothing
is to be won here by fleeing into the close-to-life reality of a very
questionable "life."
The obvious course is to investigate whether it is not the case that
in the question, "Why is there truth?," truth can be unfolded as the
ground of the "why" and thus determined in its essence.
Yet the question does indeed seem to be already bound-indeterminately,
confusedly, and ordinarily enough-to a knowledge of
"truth," so as to make problematic again the question of whether an
appeal to such knowledge and opinion can be borne out.
Where will we then be tottering if we renounce appearances and
what is common?
What if we nevertheless came into the nearness of the event,
which might be obscured in its essence but still does show that a
"between" essentially occurs between us and beyng and that this
"between" itself belongs to the essential occurrence of beyng?
§237 [368-369] 291
237. Belief and truth
What is meant here is not its particular form as membership in a "denomination"
but, instead, the essence of belief, grasped on the basis of
the essence of truth.
To believe: to deem true. In this sense, it means to appropriate what
is "true," no matter how that is given and how it can be taken over. In
this broad sense: to concur.
The deeming true will change according to what is true in each case
(and wholly and above all according to truth itself and its essence).
Belief, especially in its open or tacit opposition to knowledge, means
deeming true that which withdraws from knowledge in the sense of
explanatory insight (for example: to "believe" a report whose "truth"
cannot be verified but which is vouched for by informants and witnesses).
It becomes clear even in this case: the belief, in its essentiality,
depends on the respective mode of knowledge opposed to it.
Belief: deeming true that which utterly withdraws from all knowledge.
But what does knowledge mean here? Which is the authentic
knowledge? The one that knows the essence of truth and is consequently
first determined, in the turning, out of this essence itself.
If the essence of truth is the clearing for the self -concealing of beyng,
then knowledge is an abiding in this clearing of concealment and is thus
the basic relation to the self-concealing of beyng and to beyng itself.
This knowledge is then not deeming true just something or other
that happens to be true or even something preeminently true; instead,
it is originally an abiding in the essence of truth.
This knowledge, essential knowledge, is then more original than
any belief, for the latter is merely concerned with something true;
therefore, if belief is ever to escape utter blindness, it must indeed
necessarily know what it means to be true and to be a truth!
Essential knowledge is an abiding in the essence. What is supposed
to be expressed thereby is the fact that such knowledge is not a mere
representation of an encounter; it is persistence within the bursting
forth of a projection which, in the very opening up, comes to know
the abyss that bears it.
Hence, if "knowing" is taken in the previous sense of representing,
possessing representations, then essential knowing is obviously not a
"knowing" but a "believing." Yet this word then takes on quite a different
sense, no longer that of deeming true, whereby truth is confusedly
enough already known, but the sense of an abiding in the
truth. This, as projective, is always a questioning, indeed the original
292 V. The Grounding
questioning as such, in which humans place themselves out into truth
and place themselves up for decision with respect to the essence.
Questioners of this kind are the original and proper believers, Le.,
those who in a radical way take seriously truth itself, not only what is
true, and who place up for decision the question of whether the essence
of truth essentially occurs and whether this essential occurrence
itself bears and leads us, the knowing, believing, acting, and
creating ones or, in short, the historical ones.
To be sure, this originary belief is not like an acceptance of that
which immediately offers support and makes courage superfluous.
Instead, this belief is persistence in the extreme decision. Only such
belief can bring our history to a grounded ground once again.
The reason is that this originary belief is not an egotistic snatching
up of a homemade certitude. It is not such a snatching up inasmuch
as it places itself, as questioning, precisely out into the essential occurrence
of being and experiences the necessity of what is a-byssal.
d) Time-space as the abyssal ground
238. Time-space
In what sort of questioning is initially situated that which is called
time-space.
Time-space as arising out of, and belonging to, the essence of truth
and as the thereby grounded structure (joining) of the "there," a structure
of transport-captivation. (Not yet a "schema" for the representation
of things, not yet mere flowing-by in the order of succession.)
The site of the moment; the strife of world and earth. The strife;
the sheltering of the truth of the event.
Time-space and the "facticity" of Dasein (d. Laufende Anmerkungen
zu "Sein und Zeit" I, chap. 5!). The "between" of the turning and indeed
as explicitly steadfast in a historical way! Determines itself as the here
and now! The uniqueness of Da-sein. Accordingly, uniqueness of knowingly
enduring what is assigned and bestowed.
Time-eternity-moment
The eternal is not the incessant; it is instead that which can withdraw
in a moment so as to recur later. What can recur: not as the identical but
as the newly transforming, the one and unique, i.e., beyng, such that it
is not immediately recognized, in this manifestness, as the same!
Then what is eternalization?
294 v. The Grounding [372-373]
239. Time-space28
(preparatory deliberation)
Space and time, each represented for itself and in their usual conjunction,
arise out of time-space, which is more originary than they
themselves and than their calculatively represented conjunction. But
time-space belongs to truth in the sense of the originating essential
occurrence of being as event. (Only on this basis can it be grasped
why the relation between "being and time" transitionally points the
way.) Yet the question is how and in what guise time-space belongs
to truth. What truth itself is cannot be immediately and sufficiently
said in itself, but only in grasping time-space.
Time-space is the appropriated sundering of the turning paths of the
event, the sundering of the turning between belonging and call, between
abandonment by being and beckoning intimation (the trembling
in the oscillation of beyng itself!). Nearness and remoteness, emptiness
and bestowal, verve and hesitation-in these the hidden essence of
time-space resides, and so they cannot be grasped temporally and spatially
on the basis of the usual representations of time and space.
How is this to be brought closer to the mode of representation
usual today? In this regard, various preparatory ways can be taken,
even if the surest way seems to be to abandon the entire previous
domain in which space and time have been represented and conceptualized
and attempt to start afresh. But that is not possible, since the
issue here is not at all the mere modification of representation and of
the directionality of representation; rather, what is called for is a dislodging
of the essence of the human being into Da-sein. Questioning
and thinking must indeed be inceptual, but they must still be precisely
transitional (d. The interplay).
Meditation on the provenance out of the history of the first beginning
(being as beingness-constant presence) is unavoidable. What
must be shown is how it happens that space and time become representations
as schemata (concept of "ordo") ("forms of intuition") for
"mathematical" calculation and why these concepts of space and time
dominate all thinking, even and precisely where there is talk of "lived
time" (Bergson and others).
28. Cf. The interplay, 108. The basic metaphysical positions within the history of the
guiding question and their respective interpretations of time-space (or of space and time);
d. lecture course, Die Frage nach dem Ding: Zu Kants Lehre von den transzendentalen
Grundsatzen, winter semester 1935-36 (GA41), p. 14ff.
§239 [373-374] 295
That requires an interpretation of Aristotle's Physics b. on T6rro~
["place"] and xpovoe; ["time"], which of course must be set within the
framework of the entire basic position of the Physics.
It will thus be seen how here the representation as a "schema" is
still not attained and also cannot be attained, since such a representation
presupposes the emergence of the "mathematical" in the modern
sense. In turn this latter, i.e., the corresponding interpretation of
space and time, is possible only after its basis, the Greek experience
of beingness, is lost and immediately replaced by the Christian interpretation
of beings along with a retention of Aristotle's "results." The
debilitation of ouota and the emergence of substantia already long
since prepared.
And thereby accomplished by nominalism.
How there is still maintained, and precisely in the modern era, a
metaphysical interpretation of space and time which is attempted in
a new way: space as the sensorium Dei.
The ambiguity of space and time for Leibniz, with the origination
obscure; in Kant simply attributed to the human subject!
Yet all this without an intimation of time-space.
Why and under which presuppositions is the separation of space
and time historically necessary?
Is there a way out of the accomplished separation, back to another
origin? It seems so. For it will always appear, with the maintaining of
the familiar representations of space and time, as if something "metaphysical"
were imputed to these empty forms of order (Which order?).
Yet the question indeed concerns the justification and the provenance
of these empty forms, whose truth is still not demonstrated on the
basis of their correctness and usefulness in the field of calculation; it is
just the opposite that is demonstrated here.
On the other hand, the return to their provenance does in fact not
lead to the origin of their essence, to "truth," even if Torroe; (granting
place) and Xpovo<; (pertaining to the ¢uX~) point back to <pUOt<;. Yet
that does not at all require "mythological" "representations." For
such representations are to be grasped only last, as anterior with respect
to the first beginning. If they are taken as the starting point,
then what results is at most the "triviality" that here something is
still experienced "irrationally" which later comes to be placed in the
light of ratio.
Which is the path to a first, pre-cursory, and indeed transitional
meditation on time-space? From Da-sein's site of the moment. How
from it, if we are so withdrawn from Da-sein?
Can the starting point be the question of the "unity" of "space and
time," as that is usually represented? (Cf. the introduction to the lecture
296 V. The Grounding (374-375]
course of w. s. 1935-36.) why, and how are space and tirnt:
thought together since antiquity? Which is the basic experience here,
even if it could not be mastered? (the "there"!) Only superficially, according
to the prevailing beingness? Yet how is the "and" related 10
space, how to time? Has that ever been asked? Can it be asked at all?
The "and" is in truth the ground of the essence of both space and
time, the dislodging into the encompassing open realm which forms
presencing and constancy but which could not itself be experienced
or grounded. Cf. the collapse of a) .. ~e£la: and its simultaneous transformation
into o}loiwm<; (correctness).
For the experiencing projection does not occur here as the representation
of a general essence (y£vo<;), but in an original-historical
entrance into Da-sein's site of the moment. To what extent such an
entrance in Greek tragedy?
The site of the moment: the uniqueness and the intrusion of the most
luminous transposal into the domain of the intimation out of the
gentle captivation by what is self-withholding and hesitant, nearness
and remoteness in the decision, the where and the when of the history
of being as self-clearing and self-concealing out of the appropriation
of the basic disposition of restraint. This and the basic experience
of the "there" and thus of time-space.
Now, admittedly, to relate the representation of space and time back
to dispositions seems to be not only a metaphysical positioning of the
empty forms but also at the same time indeed a new "subjectivizing."
With respect to the latter, however, it should be remarked:
Because Da-sein is essentially selfhood (domain of what is proper)
and selfhood for its part is the ground of the "I" and the "we" and of
all lower and higher "subjectivity," therefore the unfolding of timespace
out of the site of the moment is no subjectivizing but, instead,
is its overcoming, if not already its radical, anticipatory repulsion.
This origin of time-space corresponds to the uniqueness of beyng
as event and brings itself into its open realm only in the occurrence
of the sheltering of truth in accord with the currently necessary path
of sheltering.
Time-space as the essential occurrence of truth (essential occurrence
of the abyssal ground) first comes to be known in carrying out
the other beginning. Prior to that, however, it remains veiled-and
indeed necessarily so-in the guise of the uncomprehended but familiar
naming of "space" and "time" together.
Whence stems the priority of space and time as empty, the priority
of their immediately represented extension and of their quantifiability
and calculability?
§241 [375-377] 297
Everything goes back to the Greeks' basic experience of ouota.
Thereby space and time immediately represented and indeed also that
which obtrudes as representable thus in q)l)Ol<; (d. the corresponding priority
of the vvv as regards time).
Posited along with presence is the 1t£pa<; ["limit"], the 1tEPl£XOV
["that which encloses"]. This postulation and its interpretation remain
and are not brought back into something more originary, for that is
possible only on the basis of the question of the truth of being; for Aristotle,
on the other hand, the 1tOV ["where"] and the 1tOT£ ["when"] are
categories, determinations of beingness, of ouota!
Whatever then is added in neo-Platonism, Augustine, and the
Middle Ages, such as eternity according to Christian faith and the
summum ens, the basic postulation remains and is the substratum for
the mathesis which in Descartes comes to count as the essential guideline
for the determination of beingness. Thus calculability and pure
mechanics become prominent afortiori, while space and time entrench
themselves in this interpretation as tenaciously and self-evidently
as the representation of beingness.
The question of their unifying-original, completely other sort of essence
is utterly strange, incomprehensible, and thus arbitrary.
240. Time and space.
Their "reality" and their "provenance"
"Time" has the character of the "I" as little as space has the character
of the thing; afortiori, space is not "objective" nor time "subjective."
Time and space, as belonging to the essence of truth, are originally
united in time-space and are the abyssal grounding of the "there";
through the "there," selfhood and what is true of beings first come to
be grounded.
The difficulty involved in asking about the "reality" and "provenance"
of space and time is characteristic of the horizon in which
occurs in general the guiding question, "What are beings?" Cf. timespace
as the abyss.
241. Space and time-time-space
Space is radically different from time. In a particular respect, space can
be represented as an ordo and as the sphere for things conjointly at
hand, which indicates that space, as so represented, is representable in
298 V. The Grounding [377-378]
terms of a presencing (a determinate mode of temporality). But this
says nothing at all about what space itself is. The fact that the represen ~
tation of space occurs in a temporal way does not mean that space
should be reduced to "time." Instead, space and time are not only different
in the number of "dimensions" they are ordinarily thought to
possess but are also radically different different in their most proper
essence, and only in virtue of this extreme difference do they point
back to their origin, time-space. The more purely the proper essence of
each is preserved and the deeper their origin is placed, so much more
readily is their essence grasped as time-space in its belonging to the essence
of truth as clearing ground for concealment.
1. As little as the ordinary notion of a "space of time" [" Zeitraum"J
touches on what is meant by time-space [Zeit-Raum] or could even
be a point of departure for a path to the essence of time-space,
2. just so little is time-space merely a coupling of space and time in
the sense that time, taken as the "t" of calculative formulas, would
be made into the fourth parameter, whereby the four-dimensional
"space" of physics is postulated. Here space and time are merely
tied together, after they both have already been leveled down to
the sameness of what is calculable and what makes calculation
possible.
3. Yet time-space is a mere coupling also in another, possibly conceivable
sense: e.g., in the sense that every historical occurrence
would have its "when" and "where" and thus would be determined
temporally-spatially.
Instead, their unity is that of the origin, and this origin can be
traced only if
1. the essence of each is clarified as properly its own, and
2. each essence in itself is exhibited in its extreme separateness to the
other, and
3. each essence in itself is grasped as arising from something originary;
and
4. this that is originary, the common root of both, is grasped as other
than they and yet such that, as a root, it needs both of them as
"shoots" in order to be a root-grounding ground (= the essence of
truth).
The interpretation of space and time on the basis of time-space
does not seek to prove that the previous notions of space and time are
"false." On the contrary, these notions will then for the first time be
fitted into the (to be sure, limited) domain of their correctness, and
it will be made clear that space and time are as inexhaustible in their
essence as is beyng itself.
§242 [378-379] 299
The ordinary and already old notion of a "space of time "
is meant as a determination of time by itself and only of time. It does
not mean, as does the word time-space, that grounding essence which
is originarily unified with respect to time and space.
"Space of time" means a span of "time," the "from now until then,"
the "from then up to today," etc. We speak of a "space of time" one
hundred years in length. Time is represented here as spacious, inasmuch
as it, qua measure-number, encompasses something, a from ...
up to ... , something measured. What is meant here is thus not even
metaphorically that open realm of time which pertains to its ecstases
and which is obviously not "spatial." Represented in the term "space of
time" is therefore also the ordinary concept of "time."
An elucidation of time-space could be expected from a consideration
of the history of the representations of space and time.
Yet all those historiological accounts, attempted in all sorts of ways
since the nineteenth century, are blind, useless, and bereft of any actuaL
philosophizing question, not to mention the fact that they merely
pick out and string together "passages" in which some problem or
other is discussed.
The history of the "representations" of space and time is the history
of the truth of beyng and can be exhibited in a philosophically
fruitful way only if joined to the history of the guiding question.
Everything else is erudite pretence which merely leads further astray
into the superficiality of gathering and comparing passages.
242. Time-space as the abyssal ground
The abyssal ground [Ab-grund] is the originary essential occurrence
of the ground [Grund]. The ground is the essence of truth. If timespace
is thus grasped as abyssal ground, and, reciprocally, if the abyssal
ground is grasped more determinately by way of time-space, then
the turning relation and the belonging of time-space to the essence
of truth are thereby opened up.
The abyss is the originary unity of space and time, that unifying
unity which first allows them to diverge into their separateness.
Yet the abyssal ground is also, and primarily, the originary essence
of the ground, of its grounding, of the essence of truth.
What is the abyssal ground? What is its mode of grounding? The
abyssal ground is the staying away of the ground.
300 V. The Grounding [379-380]
And what is the ground? It is that which veils itself and also takes
up, because it bears and does so as the protruding of what is to be
grounded. Ground: self-concealing in a protruding that bears.
Abyssal ground: staying away; as ground in self-concealing, a selfconcealing
in the mode of the withholding of the ground. Yet withholding
is not nothing; instead, it is a preeminent and originary kind
of leaving unfulfilled, leaving empty. It is thereby a preeminent kind
of opening up.
The abyss, however, as the essential occurrence of the ground, is
not sheer self-withholding in the sense of simple withdrawal and
going away. The lack of the ground is the lack of the ground [Der Abgrund
ist Ab-grund]. In withholding itself, the ground preeminently
brings into the open, namely into the first opening of that emptiness
which is thereby a determinate one. Inasmuch as the ground, even
and precisely as abyss, still grounds and yet does not properly ground,
it abides in hesitancy.
The abyssal ground is the hesitant self-withholding of the ground.
In this withholding, the originary emptiness opens up and the originary
clearing occurs, but this clearing is such that, at the same time,
hesitation is manifest in it.
The abyssal ground is the primessential clearing concealment, the
essential occurrence of truth.
Since truth is the clearing concealment of beyng, however, it is as
abyssal ground chiefly a ground that grounds only as bearing and allowing
the protruding of the event. For the hesitant withholding is the
intimation that beckons Da-sein, and this latter is precisely the constancy
of clearing concealment. This occurrence is the oscillation of the
turning between call and belonging; it is ap-propriation, beyng itself.
Truth grounds as the truth of the event. The event, grasped from the
perspective of truth as ground, is therefore the primordial ground
[Ur-grund]. The primordial ground opens itself, as what is selfconcealing,
only in the abyssal ground [Ab-grund]. Yet the abyss is
completely disguised through the distorted ground [Un-grund] (d.
below).
The primordial ground, the one that grounds, is beyng, but in each
case as essentially occurring in its truth.
The more groundingly the ground (the essence of truth) is fath-
0med' the more essentially does beyng occur.
Yet the fathoming of the ground must venture the leap into the
abyssal ground and must fathom the abyssal ground itself and endureit.
The abyssal ground, as the staying away of the ground in the indicated
sense, is the first clearing of the open as "emptiness."
§242 [380-382] 301
But how is emptiness to be understood here? Not in the sense that
space and time, as forms of ordering and as frameworks for calculable
and objectively present things, are simply vacant, i.e., not in the
sense of the sheer absence of such things therein, but, rather, in the
sense of a temporal-spatial emptiness, an originary yawning open in
hesitant self-withholding. Nevertheless, must the latter not strike up
against a claim, a search, a will to reach, just in order to be a selfwithholding?
Certainly, but both essentially occur in each case as
event, and the only task now is to determine the essence of the emptiness
itself, which means to think the a-byssal character of the
abyss, i.e., how the abyssal ground grounds. In the proper sense, that
is always and only to be thought out of the primordial ground, the
event, and in carrying out the leap into its oscillating turn.
The abyssal ground, as the staying away of the ground, is indeed supposed
to be the essential occurrence of truth (i.e., the essential occurrence
of the clearing concealment). The staying away of the ground-is
that not the absence of truth? Yet the hesitant self-withholding is precisely
the clearing for concealment and is thus the presencing of truth.
Certainly, "presencing," but not in the way something objectively present
has come to presence; instead, the essential occurrence of what first
founds the presence and absence of beings and not only this.
The "staying away" as (hesitant) self-withholding of the ground is the
essential occurrence of the ground as abyssal ground. The ground needs
the abyssal ground. Furthermore, the clearing which occurs in the selfwithholding
is not a mere gaping hole or chasm (xao<;-versus q>001<;); it
is the attuned disposing of the essential dis-lodgments of precisely this
cleared being which allows such self-concealing to stand within it.
That is so because truth as clearing concealment is the truth of
beyng as event, i.e., as the appropriation that oscillates back and
forth, that grounds itself in the truth (in the essential occurrence of
the "there"), and that also attains for itself therein, and only therein,
the clearing for its self-concealing.
The event attunes and pervasively disposes the essential occurrence
of truth. The openness of the clearing of concealment is therefore
originarily not the mere emptiness of vacancy; instead, it is the
disposed and disposing emptiness of the abyssal ground which, according
to the attuning intimation of the event, is a disposed abyssal
ground, i.e., here, a joined one.
Moreover, "emptiness" is not the mere non-satisfaction of an expectation
or wish. It is only as Da-sein, i.e., as restraint (d. Prospect,
13. Restraint), the withholding in the face of the hesitant self-withholding
whereby time-space is grounded as the site of the moment
for the decision.
302 V. The Grounding [382-383]
By the same token, "emptiness" is actually the fullness of what is
still undecided and is to be decided, the abyssal ground that points to
the ground, i.e., to the truth of being.
"Emptiness" is the fulfilled plight of the abandonment by being,
but this as already transposed into the open and thus as related to the
uniqueness of beyng and to its inexhaustibility.
"Emptiness" not as what accompanies a neediness and its plight,
but as the plight of restraint which is in itself an erupting projection
and the basic disposition of the most originary belonging.
To name "emptiness" that which opens itself in the ap-propriation
of restraint toward the hesitant withholding is therefore inapt and
still too strictly determined by a nearly insurmountable orientation
toward space as a thing and time as a process.
That which opens itself for concealment is originarily the remoteness
of the undecidability clinging to the question of whether the
god is moving away from us or toward us. That means: in this remoteness
and its undecidability, there is manifest the concealment of
that which, on account of this opening, is called god.
This "remoteness" of undecidability is prior to every discrete "space"
and every demarcated flowing-by of time. It is also prior to all dimensionalities,
for these arise only out of the sheltering of truth, and thus
of time-space, in beings and indeed primarily in objectively present
and changing things.
Only where something objectively present is seized and determined
does there arise the flow of "time" that flows by in it and the
"space" that surrounds it.
The abyssal ground, as the first essential occurrence of the ground,
grounds (allows the ground to occur essentially as ground) in the
mode of temporalization and spatialization.
Yet here is the critical point for the correct conception of the abyssal
ground. Temporalization and spatialization cannot be grasped on the
basis of the usual representations of time and space; it is just the opposite:
these representations must be determined according to their
provenance out of the primessential temporalizing and spatializing.
Whence do temporalizing and spatializing have their unitary origin
and their separateness? Of what sort is the originary unity, such
that it casts itself asunder into this separation, and in what sense are
the two separate moments here precisely unitary as the essential occurrence
of the abyssal ground? It cannot be a matter here of any sort
of "dialectic"; it is a matter only of the essential occurrence of the
ground (and thus of truth) itself.
The structure of this essential occurrence must ever and again be
placed into the projection: the essence of truth is a clearing concealment
§242 [383-384] 303
which takes up the event and, by bearing it, lets its oscillation protrude
through the open. As bearing and letting protrude, truth is the ground
of beyng. The "ground" is not more originary than beyng; it is the origin
as what allows beyng, the event, to be reached in a leap.
Yet truth is a ground that grounds originarily as the abyssal ground.
The latter itself grounds as the unity of temporalization and spatialization.
These accordingly derive their essence from that whereby the
ground is the ground, i.e., from the event.
The intimation is the hesitant self-withholding. The self-withholding
creates not only the emptiness of privation and austerity but
also, along with these, an emptiness as one that is in itself transporting,
i.e., transporting into the "to come" and thereby simultaneously
bursting open what has been. The latter, by making an impact together
with what is to come, constitutes the present as a move into
the abandonment that remembers and expects.
This abandonment, however, because it originarily occurs as remembering
and expecting (the belonging to being and the call of
beyng), is in itself no mere sinking down and dying away into complete
deprivation; on the contrary, it is the present-the momentwhich
is raised up and is directed out only toward the decision. Incorporated
into the moment are all the transportings, and the moment
itself essentially occurs merely as the gathering of the transportings.
The remembering expectation (remembering a hidden belonging to
beyng, expecting a call of beyng) brings up for decision the question of
whether or not beyng intrudes. To express it more clearly, temporalization,
as this dispensation of the (hesitant) self-withholding, a-byssally
grounds the domain of decision. With the transporting into that which
withholds itself (this is precisely the essence of temporalizing), everything
would indeed already be decided. Yet what withholds itself does
so in a hesitant way and thereby grants the possibility of bestowal and
appropriation. The self-withholding dispenses the transporting which
is characteristic of temporalizing, but, as hesitant, it is also the most originary
captivation of things. This captivation is the embrace in which the
moment and thus the temporalization are held fast (like the originary
abyssal ground? "Emptiness"? Neither that nor fullness). This captivation
also makes possible a bestowal as an essential possibility, grants
bestowal a space. The captivation is the spatialization of the event.
Through the captivation, the abandonment is an established one which
is to be withstood.
The "staying away" of the ground, its abyssal character, is disposed
out of the hesitant self-withholding and is at once temporalizing and
spatializing, transporting and captivating. The spatializing is grounding
and is the site of the moment. Time-space, as the unity of the
304 V The Grounding [384-386]
originary temporalization and spatialization, is itself originarily the
site of the moment, and this site is the a-byssal, essential temporality-
spatiality for the openness of concealment, i.e., for the "there."
Then whence the separation into temporalization and spatialization?
From the transporting and captivating, which, as fundamentally
different, require each other, i.e., from the unity of the hesitant with·
holding. And whence the separation of transport and captivation?
From the hesitant withholding, which is the intimation as the inceptual
essence of the event, inceptual in the other beginning. This essence
of beyng is unique and non-repeatable and thereby satisfies the
innermost essence of beyng; CPU(Jl<; also is unique and non-repeatable,
If this temporalization and this spatialization constitute the originary
essence of time and space, then their provenance (an abyssal
provenance that grounds the abyssal ground) is made visible out of the
essence of being. Time and space (originarily) "are" not; instead, they
essentially occur.
Yet the hesitant withholding itself possesses this originarily unifying
structure of self-withholding and hesitancy out of the intimation. This
latter is the self-opening of what is self-concealing as such and indeed is
the self-opening for and as the ap-propriation in the sense of the call
into the belonging to the event itself, i.e., to the grounding of Da-sein
(Da-sein understood as the domain of the decision regarding beyng).
But this intimation comes to intimate only in the resonating of
beyng out of the plight of the abandonment by being and merely says
once again: it is neither from the call nor from a belonging, but only
from the "between" in which both come to be in oscillation, that the
event opens itself and that the projection of the origin of time-space,
as originary unity, can be enacted out of the abyss of the ground (the
net, d. The leap, 142. The essence ofbeyng).
Space is the captivating and abyssal grounding of the embrace.
Time is the transporting and abyssal grounding of the gathering.
The captivation is the abyssal embrace of the gathering.
The transporting is the abyssal gathering into the embrace.
If transporting proves to be a gathering, and captivation an embrace,
then in each case there is a countercurrent at work. For transporting
seems at first to be a dispersing, and captivation an estrangement. This
countercurrent is precisely the essential and points to the originary referentiality
of both to each other on the basis of their separateness.
Time spatializes and is never captivating.
Space temporalizes and is never transporting.
Even in their unity, space and time have nothing in common; instead,
what unifies them, what allows them to emerge in that inseparable
referentiality, is time-space, the abyssal grounding of the ground: the
§242 [386-387] 305
essential occurrence of truth. This e-mergence [Ent-springen], however,
is not a tearing off; just the opposite: time-space is merely the unfolding
of the essence of the essential occurrence of truth.
The abyssal grounding of the ground is not thereby exhausted in
its essence; it is merely clarified as the grounding of the "there."
Time-space is the gathering embrace that captivates and transports
at once; it is the abyssal ground which is structured in this way,
which disposes accordingly, and whose essential occurrence becomes
historical in the grounding of the "there" by Da-sein (by its essential
paths of sheltering the truth).
Time-space in this, its originary essence, possesses nothing of "time"
and "space" in themselves as ordinarily understood, and yet it does
contain a development toward these, indeed in a greater richness
than could previously arise through the mathematization of space
and time.
How does it happen that time-space gives way to "space and time"?
Expressed in that manner, the question is still too ambiguous and
too easily misunderstood.
Therefore, the first step is to differentiate:
1. the not-yet-past history of T61to~ and Xp6vo~ within the interpretation
of beings as <pUo"l~ and on the basis of an undeveloped aA.~eWX
(d. The grounding, 241. Space and time-time-space, p. 299);
2. the unfolding of space and time out of the explicitly and originarily
grasped time-space as the abyss of the ground within the
thinking of the other beginning;
3. the empowering of time-space as the essential occurrence of truth
within the future grounding of Dasein through the sheltering of
the truth of the event in beings as thereby reconfigured;
4. the proper clarification, solution, or eradication of the difficulties
which in the previous history of thought have always besieged the
knowledge of space and time: e.g., the question of the "reality" of
space and time, or the question of their "infinity," or of their relation
to "things." All these questions are not only unanswerable
but are even unaskable, as long as space and time are not grasped
on the basis of time-space, Le., as long as the question of the essence
of truth is not posed radically as the question that is preliminary to
the basic question of philosophy (How does beyng essentially
occur?).
The connection of time-space to space and time and the unfolding
of these latter out of the former can be most readily and straightforwardly
clarified, at least in part, by attempting to grasp space and
time themselves in their pre-mathematical form, liberating them
from the previous interpretation and yet continuing in that direction
306 V. The Grounding [387-388]
(d. Being and Time on the spatiality of Da-sein and on temporality as
historicality) .
Yet what remains decisive is the question: what is it about space and
time that allows their mathematization? The answer lies in meditation
on the circumstance that the abyssal ground, scarcely grounded in a
productive way, is already engulfed by the distorted ground (d. the
first beginning).
The embrace of the captivation possesses the unlimited breadth of
the hidden possibilities of the intimation.
The gathering of the transporting possesses the unmeasured and
unmeasurable remoteness of the consigned, bestowed, and assigned.
The opening of the abyssal ground is not groundless. The abyss is
not a "no" to every ground in the manner of groundlessness; it is rather
a "yes" to the ground in the concealed breadth and remoteness of that
ground.
The abyssal ground is thus the inherently temporalizing, spatializing,
and oscillating site of the moment for the "between," and Dasein
must be grounded as this "between."
The abyssal ground is as little "negative" as is the hesitant withholding.
Indeed both, if understood immediately ("logically"), contain a
"no," and yet the hesitant withholding is the first and highest lighting
up of the intimation.
To be sure, a "not" does essentially occur in the hesitant withholding
if grasped more originarily. But that is the primordial "not," the
one pertaining to beyng itself and thus to the event.
The opposite path, from "space" and from "time" (d. above, p. 304f. and
The grounding, 241. Space and time-time-space):
The surest way to take the opposite path is to make visible in an interpretation
the spatiality and temporality of thing, tool, work, machination,
and of every being, as modes of sheltering the truth. The projection
of this interpretation is tacitly determined by the knowledge of
time-space as abyss. But the interpretation itself must-when departing
from the thing-awaken new experiences. The appearance that
here we have a self-evident description resting in itself is not dangerous,
because this way of interpretation indeed seeks to expound space
and time by taking its orientation from time-space. This way and the
way from beings must meet. The way from "beings" (if it is already inserted
into the open realm of the strife between earth and world) then
leads to an opportunity to incorporate the previous discussion of space
and time into the inceptual confrontation (d. The interplay).
e) The essential occurrence of truth as a sheltering
243. Sheltering
is not a subsequent berthing in beings of a truth already objectively
present in itself, not to mention the fact that truth is never something
objectively present.
Sheltering belongs to the essential occurrence of truth. This is not
an essential occurrence if it never occurs in a sheltering.
If, therefore, the "essence" of truth is indicationally called the
clearing for self-concealing, then that is done only in order to unfold
the essential occurrence of truth. The clearing must ground itself in
its open realm and has need of what maintains it in openness, and
that is in each case and in different ways a being (thing-tool-work).
But this sheltering of what is open must also and in advance be such
that the openness comes to be in a way which allows self-concealing,
and thereby beyng, to occur essentially in it.
Accordingly, it must be possible-although with a corresponding
leap ahead into beyng-to find a way from "beings" to the essential
occurrence of truth and to make visible, on this way, sheltering as
something that belongs to truth. But where is this way supposed to
start? In order to find it, must we not first grasp our current relations
to beings, such as we stand therein, and thus bring before our eyes
something most ordinary? But to do so is precisely what is most difficult,
because it can never be accomplished without a tremor, which
means: without a dislodging of the basic relation to beyng itself and
to truth (d. Prospect, 5. For the few-For the rare, p. l3f., on philosophical
knowledge).
It must be shown in which truth beings stand and how they stand in
it in each case. It must become clear how world and earth are here in
308 V. The Grounding [390-391]
strife and how this strife and thereby world and earth themselves are
concealed and unconcealed. Yet this nearest self-concealing is only an
emerging appearance of the abyssal ground and thus of the truth of the
event. On the other hand, truth essentially occurs, in the fullest and
richest clearing of the most remote self-concealing, only in the mode of
sheltering that is in accord with all the ways and modes which belong to
the sheltering and which historically bear and guide the steadfast withstanding
of Da-sein, thus constituting the being of a people.
In each case, sheltering moves the self-concealing into the open
and does so just as determinately as it itself is pervasively dominated
by the clearing of self-concealing (d. the demonstration of this connection
in the Freiburg lectures, 193629 ).
Accordingly, there is apriori no place in this projection of the essence
of truth for the still seemingly obvious presuming of the Platonic
relation. For is not the sheltering of truth in beings all too
clearly reminiscent of the insertion of the "Idea," the Ei15o<;, into the
VAll? Yet even just to speak of the sheltering of truth in beings is misleading,
as if truth could ever already in advance be for itself "truth."
Truth essentially occurs only and always already as Da-sein and
thus as the playing out of the strife. (On the origin of the ei15o<;-vAll
distinction, likewise d. the lectures just referred to.)
Nevertheless, an understanding of the connections essentially occurring
here requires a radical forsaking of the simple mode of
thinking as a representing of what is present (a forsaking of being as
presence and of truth as adequation to what is present) and a directing
of the gaze of thought so as to traverse all at once the entire essential
occurrence of truth.
244. Truth and sheltering30
Whence does sheltering derive its urgency and necessity? From selfconcealing.
The sheltering of this occurrence is needed to preserve the
self-concealing rather than do away with it. The occurrence is transformed
and maintained (Why?) in the strife of earth and world. The
playing out of the strife sets truth into work, into tool, and it experiences
truth as a thing, consummates truth in deed and sacrifice.
Yet there must always be a preservation of self-concealment, for
only thus does the history which is grounded through Dasein remain
in appropriation and accordingly something belonging to beyng.
29. "Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes." In Holzwege (GA5).
30. Cf. Prospect, 21. Inceptual thinking (Projection).
§246 [391-392] 309
245. Truth and sheltering3l
Projection and carrying out belong, in their respectively different
ways, to every sheltering of truth in beings.
Every projection is storm, felicity, verve, moment. Every carrying out
is serenity, persistence, renunciation (properly grasped; and the form
of the appertaining inauthenticity; the distorted essence?). Neither of
the two happens without co-determination through the other, and
both always on account of the necessity of a sheltering.
The sheltering of truth as a growing back into the closedness of the
earth. This growing back is never carried out in mere representations
and feelings but always in procurement, manufacture, work, or, in
short, in allowing the worlding of a world, provided this does not
deteriorate into mere bustle.
As technology is brought into service more and more, not only
will technology itself develop but its power will also increase beyond
measure and beyond check-if there does not occur a still greater and
more essential meditation on the grounding of Da-sein as a necessity
which demands stillness and long preparation for the hesitant suddenness
of the moments.
246. The sheltering of truth in what is true
Sheltering is fundamentally the preservation of the event through the
playing out of the strife.
The preservation of self-concealment (the hesitant withholding) is
not the mere safeguarding of something given; it is rather the projective
binding out into the open realm, the playing out of the strife such
that in the enduring of the strife the belonging to the event is reached
in the strife.
Thus truth essentially occurs as what is in each case true by way
of sheltering. Yet this that is true is what it is only as the un-true, at
once non-being and non-grounding.
To make accessible the sheltering of truth out of its most proximate
modes of procurement in correspondence to space and time.
31. Cf. Prospect, 35, 39. The event.
310 V. The Grounding [392]
247. The grounding of Da-sein and the paths to the
sheltering of truth
Extracted from this domain and for that reason belonging herein: the
separate question of the "origin of the work of art" (d. the Freiburg and
the Frankfurt lectures32 ).
The machine and machination (technology)
The machine, its essence. The servicing it demands, the uprooting it
causes. "Industry" (factories); industrial workers, torn out of homeland
and history, resettled as wage-earners.
Training in mechanics; machination and business. What sort of
transformation of the human being is setting in here? (World-earth?)
Machination and business. The huge number, the gigantic, sheer expansion
and ever-greater leveling down and emptying. The inexorable
deterioration into what is ungenuine, into kitsch.
32. "Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes." In Holzwege (GAS).
VI. THE FUTURE ONES!
1. Cf. Uberlegungen v, p. 44f. and VII, p. 47f.

248. The future ones
Those strangers alike in heart, equally decided for the bestowal and
refusal that have been assigned to them. The ones who bear the staff
of the truth of beyng, the truth in which beings are built up to the
dominance of the simple essence of every single thing and breath.
The stillest witnesses to the stillest stillness in which an imperceptible
impetus turns truth out of the confusion of all calculatively correct
findings and back into its essence, such that there is kept concealed
what is most concealed, viz., the trembling of the passing by
of the decision about the gods, the essential occurrence of beyng.
The future ones: the slow, far-hearing ones who ground this essence
of truth. Those who offer resistance to the thrust of beyng.
The ones to come2 are those future ones who receive-insofar as
they expect on the way back and in sacrificial restraint-the intimation
and intrusion of the absconding and nearing of the last god.
The task is to prepare for these future ones. Such preparation is
served by inceptual thinking as bearing the silence of the event. But
thinking is only one way the few venture the leap into beyng.
249. The basic disposition of the future ones3
The resonating and the interplay, the leap and the grounding, have
their own respective guiding dispositions, and all of these originally
dispose together out of the basic disposition.
Yet the point is not so much to describe this basic disposition as it
is to bring it into effect in the whole of inceptual thinking.
It is hardly to be named in one word, unless that word is "restraint."
But then this word must be taken in its entire fullness of origin, a fullness
accruing to its meaning out of the inventive thinking of the event.
2. Cf. Prospect, 45. The "decision."
3. Cf. Prospect, 5. For the feW-For the rare, p. 14ff.
314 VI. The Future Ones [396-397]
The basic disposition includes mood [Zumutesein], namely, the
temperament [Gemiit] of courage [Mut] as the mood of the attunedknowing
will of the event.
The guiding dispositions are attuned and attuning in unison with
one another.
The guiding disposition of the resonating is shock in the self-unveiling
abandonment by beyng and is at same time diffidence in the face of
the resonating event. Shock and diffidence in unity first allow the
resonating to be carried out in thought.
The unison of the guiding dispositions is fully attuned only through
the basic disposition. In it are the future ones, and as so attuned
[gestimmt] they are determined [be-stimmt] by the last god. (On disposition,
d. what is essential in the lecture courses on H61derlin.4 )
250. The future ones
stand in sovereign knowledge as genuine knowledge. Whoever attains
this knowledge cannot be subjected to calculation or compulsion. Furthermore,
this knowledge is useless and has no "value"; it does not
matter and cannot be taken as an immediate condition for a currently
ongoing business.
With what must the knowledge of those who genuinely know commence?
With authentic, historical cognition: i.e., with knowledge of the
domain out of which future history is decided and with (questioning)
steadfastness in that domain. This historical cognition never consists in
determining and delineating current incidents in their circumstances
and orientations and in their cherished goals and claims. This knowledge
knows the hours of the occurrence which first forms history.
Our own hour is the era of downgoing.
The down-going, in the essential sense, is the path to the reticent
preparation for what is to come, i.e., for the moment in which and the
site in which the advent and the remaining absent of the gods will be
decided. This downgoing is the utterly first beginning. The distorted
essence of downgoing, however, takes its own different course and is
mere foundering, impasse, stoppage, under the guises of the gigantic,
the massive, and the priority of arrangement over what is supposed to
fulfill it.
4. Lecture course, Holderlins Hymnen "Germanien" und "Der Rhein," winter semester
1934-35, (GA39); lecture course, Holderlins Hymne "Andenken," winter
semester 1941-42, (GA52); lecture course, Holderlins Hymne "Der Ister," summer
semester 1942, (GA53).
§250 315
The ones who go down in the essential sense are those who run beneath
what is coming (the futural) and sacrifice themselves to it as its
future invisible ground: the steadfast ones who perpetually expose
themselves to questioning.
Only those who belong can know the era of down-going. All others
must fear the down-going and thus deny and renounce it, for to
them it is sheer weakness and mere ending.
Those who truly go down have no acquaintance with bleak "resignation"
(which no longer wills, since it does not will anything future)
and just as little with noisy "optimism" (which, despite all the self-assurance,
still does not genuinely will, since it blocks itself against willing
beyond itself and against attaining itself only in transformation).
Those who go down are always questioning. The un-rest of questioning
is not empty uncertainty; instead, it is the opening-up and
guarding of that rest which, as the gathering together into what is
most question-worthy (the event), awaits the simple intimacy of the
call and endures the extreme wrath of the abandonment by being.
Questioning into the essence of truth and into the essential occurrence
of beyng: what else is this but resoluteness for extreme meditation?
Yet this resoluteness grows out of openness for the necessity
that makes unavoidable the experience of the plight of the abandonment
by being. The experience of this plight, however, depends in
turn on how powerful memory is or, in general, on how dominant
knowledge is.
Questioning of this sort is the restraint of seeking out where and
in what way the truth of being might be grounded and sheltered.
Seeking is never simply a matter of not yet possessing, deprivation.
To understand it in that sense is to calculate it merely in terms of the
result to be attained. Primarily and properly, seeking is an advancing
into the domain in which truth opens itself or withholds itself. Seeking
is intrinsically futural and is a coming into the nearness of being.
Seeking brings the seekers to themselves for the first time, i.e., brings
them into the selfhood of Da-sein, wherein the clearing and concealment
of beings occur.
Being a self is the finding that already lies in the seeking, the sure
illumination which already gleams prior to all veneration and in virtue
of which alone we are open for the resonating of what is most
unique and greatest.
316 VI. The Future Ones [398-399J
251. Da-sein and the essence of a people5
A people is a people only if it receives its history as allotted to it through
finding its god, the god that compels this people beyond itself and thus
places the people back amid beings. Only then does a people escape the
danger of circling around itself and of idolizing, as its unconditioned,
what are merely conditions of its subsistence. How is a people supposed
to find the god, however, unless there are seekers who in reticence seek
on behalf of this people and who, as these seekers, must apparently even
stand against a "people" that is not yet properly a people? Yet these seekers
themselves must first be; the task is to prepare for them precisely as
beings. Da-sein: what else is it but the grounding of the being of these
beings, the future ones of the last god?
The essence of a people is grounded in the historicality of those
who belong to themselves through their belonging to the god. Out of
the event, wherein this belonging is historically grounded, first arises
the reason "life" and the lived body, procreation and lineage, or, most
basically, the earth belong to history and in their own way in turn
take history back up into themselves. In all this they are merely in
service to the strife between earth and world, borne by the most in·
trinsic diffidence as in each case something unconditioned. For their
essence is indeed, because of its intrinsicality to the strife, at the
same time near to the event.
252. Da-sein and the future ones of the last god
This god will raise over his people the simplest, yet most extreme,
oppositions as paths on which his people wander beyond themselves,
so as to find their essence once again to make the most of their historical
moment.
World and earth, in their strife, will raise love and death to their
highest level and will integrate them into fidelity to the god and into
a capacity to endure the confusion, within a manifold mastery of the
truth of beings.
In the playing out of this strife, the future ones of the last god will reach
the event through the strife and in the broadest retrospect will recollect
the greatest created thing as the fulfilled non-repeatability and uniqueness
of being. Moreover, the massive will release all the guile of its rage
and will wash away everything uncertain and lukewarm, everything
5. Cf. The grounding, Dasein; d. Uberlegungen V, p. 35f.
§252 [399-401] 317
that finds consolation only in the past. Will the time of the gods then be
over and done and a relapse into the mere life of world-poor creatures
commence, ones for whom the earth has always remained only something
to be exploited?
Restraint and reticence will be the most intimate celebration of the
last god and will attain for themselves the proper mode of confidence
in the simplicity of things and the proper stream of the intimacy of the
captivating transport of their works. Furthermore, the sheltering of
truth will leave concealed what is most concealed and will thus lend it
a unique presence.
Today there are already a few of these future ones. Their surmising
and seeking are hardly recognizable to themselves and to their
genuine unrest. Yet this unrest is the restful enduring of the fissure.
Such unrest bears a certitude which is affected by the most diffident
and most distant intimation of the last god and is held toward the
incursion of the event. How this intimation as intimation is preserved
in restrained reticence, and how such preservation always
stands at the same time in departure and in arrival, in sorrow and in
joy, in that basic disposition of those who practice restraint, to whom
alone the fissure of beyng opens and closes itself. Fruit and accident,
intrusion and intimation.
The few future ones count among their number those who are essentially
inconspicuous, who receive no publicity, but who, in their
inner beauty, gather together the pre-gleaming of the last god and
then bestow it on the few and the rare by mirroring it back. They all
ground Da-sein, through which vibrates the concord of the divine
nearness that neither rises above itself nor sinks below itself but which
has rather taken the stability of the innermost diffidence as its most
unique space of oscillation. Da-sein: the thrusting move through all
relations of the remoteness and nearness (intrusion) of the last god.
The plethora of mere beings, of nonbeings as a whole, and the rarity
of being, for which reason the gods are sought within beings. If someone
seeks and does not find and therefore is compelled into forced
machinations, then no freedom for the restrained awaiting of an encounter
and an intimation-or for the capacity to await in such a way.
The magnanimity of the dispensation and the vigor of the confidence
in the intimation, the emerging wrath of what is frightful; may Dasein
be the innermost order out of which the playing out of the strife first
takes its law. This playing out of the strife outshines everything encountered
and first allows us to experience the simplicity of the essential.
Order is what is simplest and what shows itself, and yet it is liable
to be seen falsely as something "next to" and "above" appearances, i.e.,
precisely not seen.
318 VI. The Future Ones [401]
The future ones, the ones steadfast in the mood of restraint within
grounded Da-sein, the only ones approached by being (the leap) as
event, appropriated by the event, and given the power to secure its
truth.
H6lderlin approaches the future ones from the farthest away and
accordingly is their most futural poet. Holderlin is the most futural
because he approaches from the longest distance and in this distance
traverses and transforms what is greatest.
VII. THE LAST GOD
The god wholly other than
past ones and especially other than
the Christian one.

253. What is last
is what not only needs the longest ante-cedence [Vor-lauferschaft] but
what itself is the most profound beginning rather than a cessation,
the beginning which reaches out the furthest and catches up to itself
with the greatest difficulty.
What is last is therefore withdrawn from all calculation and for that
reason must be able to bear the burden of the loudest and most repeated
misinterpretation. How else could it remain what is surpassing?
If we have such a poor grasp even of "death" in its extremity, then
how will we ever measure up to the rare intimation of the last god?
254. Refusal
We are moving into the time-space of the decision regarding the absconding
and advent of the gods. How so? Will the absconding or the
advent become a future occurrence? Must the one or the other determine
the constructive waiting? Or is the decision the opening up of
an entirely different time-space for a (indeed the very first) grounded
truth of beyng, i.e., for the event?
What if that domain of decision as a whole, the absconding or advent
of the gods, were precisely the ending itself? What if, over and
above that, beyng in its truth had to be grasped for the first time as
appropriation, as the eventuating of that which we call refusal?
That is neither absconding nor advent, and also not absconding as
well as advent; instead, it is something originary, the fullness of the
bestowal of beyng in the refusal. Therein is grounded the origin of
the future style, i.e., restraint within the truth of beyng.
The refusal is the highest nobility of bestowal and is the basic trait
of the self-concealment whose manifestness constitutes the originary
essence of the truth of beyng. Only in this way does beyng become
estrangement itself, the stillness of the passing by of the last god.
But Da-sein is appropriated, in beyng, as the grounding of the
stewardship of this stillness.
322 VII. The Last God
The absconding and advent of the gods are now moving together
into what has been and are withdrawn from the past.
But what is to come, the truth of beyng as refusal, contains the
guarantee of vastness-not that of an empty and gigantic eternity, but
that of the shortest path.
Yet belonging to this truth of beyng, to the refusal, is the veiling of
nonbeings as such, the loosening and squandering of beyng. Only
now must the abandonment by being remain. This loosening, however,
is not empty arbitrariness and disorder; on the contrary, everything
is now strictly bound in planning and control and in the exactitude
of a sure course of action and a domination "without remainder."
Nonbeings, under the semblance of beings, are brought by machination
into the haven of beings, and human desolation, which is ineluctably
compelled thereby, finds its compensation in "lived experience."
All this, as distorted essence, must become more necessary than
ever before, because what is strangest also needs what is most common,
and the fissure of beyng should not be obstructed through the
concocted semblance of counter-balancings, "success," and false completion;
for the last god hates all those more than anything else.
To speak of the last god-is that not a degradation of God, indeed
pure and simple blasphemy? Yet what if the last god must be so
named, because the decision about the gods ultimately leads under
and among them and so raises to the highest the essence of the
uniqueness of the Godhead?
If we think calculatively here and take "last" in the sense of sheer
stoppage and ending, rather than in the sense of the most extreme and
most compendious decision about what is highest, then any knowledge
of the last god is of course impossible. Yet why should thinking
about the Godhead be a matter of calculation instead of an attempt at
meditation on the danger of something strange and incalculable?
255. The turning in the event!
The event has its innermost occurrence and its furthest reach in the
turning. The turning which essentially occurs in the event is the concealed
ground of all other, subordinate turnings, circles, and loops (d.,
for example, the turning in the structure of the guiding questions or the
circle in understanding), ones whose origin remains obscured and unquestioned,
although they are readily taken in themselves as the "last."
1. Here the event is viewed with respect to the human being, who is determined
as Dasein on the basis of the event.
323
What is this originary turning in the event? Only the intrusion of
beyng, as the appropriation of the "there," brings Da-sein to itself and
thus to the carrying out (sheltering) of the steadfastly grounded truth
in beings, which find their abode in the cleared concealment of the
"there."
And in the turning: Only the grounding of Da-sein, the preparing of
the preparedness for the captivating transport into the truth of beyng,
brings to the intimation of the intruding appropriation that which
hears and belongs.
If, through the event, Da-sein as the open center of the selfhood
that grounds truth is first thrown to itself and becomes a self, then
Dasein again, as the concealed possibility of the grounding essential
occurrence of beyng, must belong to the event.
And in the turning: The event must require Dasein and, in needing
it, must place it in the call and thereby bring it before the passing
by of the last god.
The turning essentially occurs in between the call (to the one that
belongs) and the belonging (of the one that is called): the turning is
a counter-turning. The call to the leap into the appropriation is the
great stillness of the most concealed self-knowledge.
Every language of Da-sein originates here and is thus in essence
silence (d. restraint, event, truth, and language).
As counter-turning, the event "is" therefore the highest reign over
the advent and absconding of the past gods. The most extreme god
needs beyng.
The call is intrusion and remaining absent in the mystery of the
appropriation.
Playing out in the turning are the intimations of the last god as the
intrusion and remaining absent of the advent and absconding of the
gods and of their abode of sovereignty.
In these intimations the law of the last god is intimated, the law of
the great individuation in Da-sein, of the solitude of the sacrifice,
and of the uniqueness of the choice regarding the shortest and steepest
path.
In the essence of the intimation lies the mystery of the unity of the
innermost nearing in the most extreme distance, the traversal of the
broadest temporal-spatial playing field of beyng. This extremity of
the essential occurrence of beyng requires what is most intrinsic in
the plight of the abandonment by being.
This plight must belong and listen to the call of the reigning of that
intimation. What resonates and spreads out in such listening is first
able to prepare for the strife of earth and world, i.e., for the truth of the
"there" and, through the "there," for the site of the moment of the
324 VII. The Last God [408-409]
decision and so for the playing out of the strife and thus for the sheltering
in beings.
Whether this call of the extreme intimation, this most concealed ap'
propriation, still happens openly, or whether the plight becomes mute
instead and all reigning is withheld, and whether the call is still taken
up, provided it does happen at all, and whether the leap into Da-sein
and thus, out of the truth of the latter, the turning still become history-
therein is decided the future of humans. They may for centuries
still ravish and devastate the planet with their machinations, and the
monstrousness of this drive may "develop" to an inconceivable extent,
assume the form of an apparent strictness, and become the measuring
regulation of the devastated as such; the greatness of beyng will remain
closed off, since decisions about truth and untruth and their essence
no longer arise. All that matters is the calculation of the success
and failure of the machinations. This calculation extends into a presumed
"eternity," which is not such but is only the endless "and so on"
of what is most desolate and most fleeting.
Where the truth of being is not willed, not incorporated into a willing
of knowledge and experience, into a questioning, there all timespace
is withdrawn from the moment, i.e., from the flashing up of
beyng out of the enduring of the simple and always incalculable event.
Or else the moment still belongs only to the most solitary solitudes,
although these are denied a grounding comprehension of the
instituting of a history.
Yet these moments, and they alone, can become the preparations
in which the turning of the event unfolds into truth and joins truth.
Indeed, only pure persistence in the simple and essential, which
are uncompellable, is mature enough for the preparation of such preparedness;
the fleetingness of the frenetically self-surpassing machinations
is never so mature.
256. The last god2
essentially occurs in the intimation, in the intrusion and remaining absent
of the advent as well as of the absconding of the gods that essentially
occur as having been [gewesend] and of their concealed transformation.
The last god is not the event itself and yet is in need of the
event as that to which the one who grounds the "there" belongs.
2. Cf. The leap. 142. The essence ofbeyng and 146. Beyng and non-beyng; Prospect.
45. The "decision."
§256 [410-411] 325
This intimation, as event, places beings in the most extreme abandonment
by being and simultaneously irradiates the truth of being as
the innermost illumination of that truth.
In the domain where the intimation reigns, earth and world meet
anew in the simplest strife: purest closedness and highest transfiguration,
gentlest captivation and most frightful transport. This is in each
case historical only in the levels, domains, and degrees of the sheltering
of truth in beings, whereby alone these come to be more fully in all
the measureless, yet distorted, extinction into non-beings.
In such essential occurrence of the intimation, beyng itself attains
its maturity. Maturity is readiness to become fruit and bestowal. Occurring
essentially herein is what is last, the essential end required by
the beginning but not carried toward it. The most intrinsic finitude
of beyng reveals itself here: in the intimation of the last god.
In maturity, potency for fruit and greatness for bestowal, there lies
at the same time the most concealed essence of the "not," as the "not
yet" and the "not any longer."
From this we can surmise the intimacy and pervasiveness of the
negative in beyng. According to the essential occurrence of beyng,
however, in the play of its intrusion and remaining absent, the truth
of the not itself, and consequently also of nothingness, assumes various
forms. If this is calculated in a merely "logical" sense by way of the
denial of beings understood as objectively present things (d. the annotations
in the author's copy of "What is Metaphysics?") and is explained
superficially and terminologically, or, to put it another way, if
the questioning remains altogether outside the domain of the question
of beyng, then all objections to the question of nothingness amount to
sheer idle talk, deprived of any possibility of ever penetrating into the
decisive realm of the question of the most essential finitude of beyng.
It is possible to step into this realm, however, only through the
preparation that consists in a long presentiment of the last god. And
the future ones of the last god are prepared first and only by those
who find, traverse, and build the way back out of the experienced
abandonment by being. Without the sacrifice of these who take the
way back, the possibility of an intimation of the last god would never
dawn; they are the true fore-runners of the future ones.
(Yet these who take the way back are also wholly other than the
many merely "re-active" ones, those whose "action" amounts to nothing
more than blind attachment to the past, of which they are shortsighted.
They have never grasped what has been in its encroachment
into what is to come or what is to come in its call to what has been.)
The last god has his own most unique uniqueness and stands outside
of the calculative determination expressed in the labels "mono-theism,"
326 VII. The Last God [411-412J
"pan-theism," and "a-theism." There has been "monotheism, and every
other sort of "theism," only since the emergence of Judea-Christian
"apologetics," whose thinking presupposes "metaphysics." With the
death of this God, all theisms wither away. The multiplicity of gods is
not subject to enumeration but, instead, to the inner richness of the
grounds and abysses in the site of the moment for the lighting up and
concealment of the intimation of the last god.
The last god is not the end; the last god is the other beginning of the
immeasurable possibilities of our history. For the sake of this beginning,
the previous history must not simply cease but must instead be
brought to its end. The transfiguration of its essential basic positions
has to be carried by us into the transition and the preparation.
The preparation of the appearance of the last god is the extreme
venture of the truth of beyng. Only in virtue of this truth is the
human being successful in retrieving beings.
The greatest nearness of the last god eventuates when the event, as
the hesitant self-withholding, is elevated into refusal. The latter is essentially
other than sheer absence. Refusal, as belonging to the event,
can be experienced only on the basis of the more originary essence of
beyng as lit up in the thinking constitutive of the other beginning.
As the nearness of what cannot be averted, refusal makes Da-sein
something overcome-not as suppressed but, on the contrary, as
snatched up into the grounding of its freedom.
Whether a human being is masterful enough both to withstand
the resonating of the event as refusal and to carry out the transition
to the grounding of the freedom of beings as such, i.e., the transition
to the renewal of the world out of the saving of the earth-who could
decide and know that? Thus indeed those who are engrossed in such
a history and its grounding are always removed from one another,
peaks of the most separated mountains.
The extreme remoteness of the last god in the refusal is a peculiar
nearness, a relation that must not be deformed or eliminated by any
"dialectics."
The nearness resonates in the resonating of beyng out of the experience
of the plight of the abandonment by being. This experience, however,
is the first breakthrough toward the storm into Da-sein. For only
if the human being emerges out of this plight does this being bring to
light the necessities and, solely with them, the freedom of the belonging
to the jubilation of beyng.
When a withholding and denial press on, only someone whose
thinking is too short-sighted, i.e., not genuine, remains caught up in
them and finds there an occasion for despair. This is always evidence
§256 [412-414] 327
that we have not yet fathomed the full turning of beyng and so are
not taking the measure of Da-sein from it.
Through the refusal, Da-sein is compelled to itself as the grounding
of the site of the first passing by of the god as the self-refusing god. Only
on the basis of this moment can it be fathomed how, as the domain of
the event of that compelling, beyng must restore beings. In such mastery
of beings, the honoring of the god must be carried out.
In this battle over the last god, i.e., over the grounding of the truth
of beyng as of the time-space of the stillness of the passing by of that
god (we are not capable of battling over the god himself), we are standing
necessarily in the realm of power of beyng as event and thereby in
the furthest amplitude of the sharpest whirl of the turning.
We must prepare the grounding of truth, which makes it seem
that the honoring and hence the preservation of the last god were
already predetermined thereby. At the same time, we must know
and adhere to the fact that the sheltering of truth in beings and thus
the history of the preservation of the god are required primarily by
the god himself and by the way he needs us as ones who ground Dasein.
Required is not merely a table of commandments; instead, more
originarily, as well as essentially, the passing by of the god requires a
constancy of beings and thus of the human being in the midst of beings.
In this constancy, beings in the simplicity of their respectively
regained essence (as work, tooL thing, deed, look, word) first withstand
the passing by and so do not still it, but let it run its course.
Occurring here is not a deliverance-i.e., basically a suppression-
of the human being but, rather, an establishment of the more
original essence (the grounding of Da-sein) in beyng itself: the acknowledgment
of the belongingness of the human being to beyng
through the god and the admission by the god of needing beyng,
whereby the god does not at all renounce himself or his greatness.
The former belonging to beyng and the latter needing of beyng
first reveal beyng in its self-concealment as that turning center in
which the belonging surpasses the needing and the needing protrudes
beyond the belonging: beyng as appropriating event, which
happens out of this turning excess of itself and thus becomes the origin
of the strife between the god and the human being, between the
passing by of the god and the history of mankind.
All beings, as insistent, unique, autonomous, and paramount as
they may appear to god-less and barbarous calculation and bustle, are
merely the "standing into" the event. In such "standing into," the site of
the passing by of the last god and the stewardship of the human being
seek a constancy in order to remain prepared for the appropriation and
328 VII. The Last God [414-415]
not to resist beyng, something which indeed the previous beings, ones
in the previous truth, had to do exclusively.
The inventive thinking of the truth of beyng will succeed only if, in
the passing by of the god, the empowering of humans to their necessity
becomes manifest and thus the ap-propriation in the excess of the
turning between human belonging and divine needfulness comes into
the open, in order for the appropriation to show its self-concealment as
central and to show itself as the center of self-concealment and to compel
the oscillation and thereby make leap forth the freedom toward the
ground of beyng as grounding the "there."
The last god is the beginning of the longest history on the shortest
path of that history. A long preparation is required for the great moment
of the passing by of the last god. Peoples and states are too
small for the preparation of that moment, i.e., already torn away too
much from all growth and delivered over only to machination.
Only the great, hidden single ones will create the stillness for the
passing by of the god and will produce among themselves the reticent
unison of those who are prepared.
Beyng, as the most unique and most rare, in opposition to nothingness,
will have withdrawn itself from the massiveness of beings,
and all history-where it reaches down to its proper essence-will
serve only this withdrawal of being into its full truth. Yet the successes
and failures of everything public will swarm and follow closely
one upon the other, whereby, typical of that which is public, nothing
will be surmised of what is actually happening. It is only between
this reigning of the massive and the genuinely sacrificed that the few
and their allies will seek and find one another in order to surmise
that something concealed-namely, that passing by-is happening
to them in the midst of all the tearing away of every "happening"
into what is of high speed yet at the same time completely graspable
and thoroughly consumable. The perverting and confusing of the
claims and of their domains will no longer be possible, because the
truth of beyng itself, in the sharpest falling apart of the fissure of
beyng, has brought the essential possibilities to decision.
This historical moment is not an "ideal situation," because the latter
will always be incompatible with the essence of history. Instead,
this moment is the eventuation of that turning in which the truth of
beyng comes to the beyng of truth, since the god needs beyng and
since the human being, as Da-sein, must have grounded the belonging
to beyng. Beyng as the innermost "between" is then akin to
nothingness for this moment; the god overpowers the human being,
and the latter surpasses the god-immediately, so to speak. Yet both
are only in the event, and the truth of beyng itself is as this event.
5-416] 329
Nevertheless, a long, often relapsing, and very concealed history
will transpire up to this incalculable moment which of course could
never be as superficial as a "goal." The creative ones, in the restraint
of care, must already prepare themselves hourly for stewardship in
the time-space of that passing by. Thoughtful meditation on this that
is unique (namely, the truth of beyng) can only be a path on which
what is unable to be thought in advance is nevertheless thought, i.e.,
a path on which there begins the transformation of the relation of
the human being to the truth of beyng.
With the question of beyng, which has overcome the question of beings
and thereby all "metaphysics," the torch is ignited and the first runup
to the long heat is ventured. Where is the runner who takes up the
torch and carries it to his pre-cursor? The runners must all be forerunners,
and this holds all the more strictly for those who come later.
They must not be re-runners, who at most only "improve" and rebut
what was first attempted. The fore-runners must be inceptual in an ever
more originary way than their "pre-cursors" (who actually come after
them) and must think still more simply, more richly, and altogether
uniquely the one and the same issue that is to be questioned. What they
take over by bearing the torch cannot be something said as a "doctrine,"
"system," or the like. Instead, it is something necessitated, which opens
itself only to those of abyssal origin who are among the compelled ones.
What compels, however, is only that about the event which cannot
be calculated or fabricated-in other words, only the truth of
beyng. Blessed is whoever may belong to the wretchedness of its fissure
in order to be a complying listener to the ever-inceptual dialogue
of the solitary ones. In this dialogue, the last god intimates
himself because through it he is intimated in his passing by.
The last god is not an end. The last god is the oscillation of the beginning
in itself and thus is the highest form of refusal, since what is
inceptual eludes every attempt to grasp onto it and essentially occurs
only in protruding beyond all things that, as futural, are already incorporated
into it and are delivered over to its determining power.
The end is only where beings have torn loose from the truth of
beyng and have denied every question-worthiness, i.e., every differentiation,
and endlessly comport themselves in the infinite possibilities
of what is thus torn loose. The end is the incessant "and so forth" from
which the last, as the most primordial, has withdrawn right from the
beginning and for the longest time. The end never sees itself; instead,
it considers itself the completion and will therefore be least ready and
prepared either to await, or to experience, what is last.
With our provenance out of a "metaphysically" determined position
toward beings, we will only with difficulty and delay be able to know
330 VII. The Last God [416-417]
what is otherwise, namely that neither in "personal" nor in "massively
shared" "lived experience" does the god still appear. The god appears
uniquely in the abyssal "space" of beyng itself. All previous "creeds,"
"churches," and the like cannot in the least become the essential preparation
for the encounter of god and the human being in the midst of
beyng. The reason is that the truth of beyng itself must first be grounded,
and for this task all creating must take another beginning.
How few know that the god awaits the grounding of the truth of
beyng and thus awaits the leap of the human being into Da-sein! It
seems instead that the human being would, and would have to, await
the god. Perhaps this is the most insidious form of the most profound
godlessness. Perhaps it is also the stupor of the incapacity to undergo
the appropriation of that intervention of the "there" of beyng which
first offers a site for the standing of beings into the truth and grants
them the privilege of standing in the furthest remoteness from the
passing by of the god. The granting of this privilege happens only as
history: in the transformation of beings into the essentiality of their
determination and into their liberation from being misused by the
machinations which pervert everything and exhaust beings for the
sake of profits.
VIII. BEYNG

257. Beyng
Here lie the blocks quarried from the bedrock.
Thinking.
Views of being [Das Meinen des Seins].
Being and its difference from beings.
The projection of beyng.
The inventive thinking of beyng.
The essential occurrence of beyng.
History.
Da-sein.
Language and saying.
"Beings."
The transitional question (Why are there beings at all, and not
rather nothing?).
The history of beyng (Uberlegungen VII, p. 97ff., HolderlinNietzsche).
The standpoint of the history of beyng.
The incalculable (Oberlegungen VII, p. 90ff.).
258. Philosophy
The determination of the concept of philosophy (and thus also the predetermination
of the conceptuality of its concept and of all its concepts)
which is essential now, and will be so in the future, is the historical (not
historiological) one. "Historical" means here: belonging to the essential
occurrence of beyng itself, incorporated into the plight of the truth of
beyng, and therefore bound to the necessity of that decision which altogether
disposes of both the essence of history and the essential occurrence
of history. Accordingly, philosophy is now in the first place preparation
for philosophy by way of the construction of the most proximate
foyers in whose spatial structure the words of Holderlin can be heard,
be answered by Da-sein, and in this answer be grounded for the language
of the future human being. Only thus does the human being
set foot on the next protracted passageway to beyng. Above all, the
334 VIII. Beyng [422-423]
uniqueness of HOlderlin in the history of beyng must be established; all
historiological comparisons, whether from the viewpoint of "literature"
or poetry, all "aesthetic" judgment and enjoyment, and all "political"
evaluation must be overcome, so that the moments of those who
"create" might receive their "time" (d. Oberlegungen VI, VII, VIII).
The historical destiny of philosophy culminates in knowledge of the
necessity to create a hearing for the words of HOlderlin. The ability to
hear corresponds to an ability to say which speaks out of the questionworthiness
of beyng, for this question-worthiness is the least that has
to be accomplished so as to prepare a space for the word. (If everything
were not perverted into the "scientific" and the "literary-historiological,"
then one would have to say that a preparation of thought must
occur in order to interpret H6lderlin. To "interpret" does of course not
mean here to make "understandable"; instead, it means to ground the
projection of the truth of his poetry in the meditation and disposition
wherein future Da-sein oscillates.) (Cf. Oberlegungen VI and VII on
H61derlin.)
This historical characterization of the essence of philosophy grasps
philosophy as the thinking of beyng. This thinking is never allowed to
flee into a form of beings and, in such a form, to experience all the
clear expanse of what is simple out of the gathered riches of the ordained
darkness of the simple. This thinking can also never pursue
dissolution into formlessness. On this side of form and formlessness
(which indeed exist only in beings), in the abyss of the ground of form,
this thinking must grasp the propulsion of its thrownness and bear it
into the open realm of the projection. The thinking of beyng is very
different from every adequation to objects, for this thinking must itself
belong to that which is to be thought, because beyng does not allow its
own truth to be something added to it or applied to it but, instead, "is"
itself the essence of truth. Truth, the clearing of what is self-concealing,
the clearing in whose open realm the gods and humans are appropriated
to their en-counter, itself opens up beyng as history. We
perhaps need to think this history if we are to prepare the space which
must preserve in resonance H6lderlin's words at their proper time,
words that again name the gods and humans, so that this resonance
might dispose those basic dispositions which ordain future humans to
the stewardship of the indigence of the gods.
This characterization of philosophy in terms of the historicality of
being requires an elucidation which is supported by a recollection of
previous thinking (metaphysics) but which at the same time rejoins
this thinking and what is to come in the way they belong together
historically.
The name "metaphysics" is employed here to characterize unconditionally
the entire previous history of philosophy. It is not restricted
§259 [423-424] 335
to the title of a "discipline" of scholastic philosophy, and even its later
and only partially artificial development is disregarded. The name is
supposed to say that the thinking of being takes beings, in the sense
of the objectively present, as the point of departure and the goal for
a passing over to being which becomes at the same time an immediate
passing back again into beings.
Meta-physics is the justification of the "physics" of beings through a
constant flight from beyng. "Metaphysics" is the unacknowledged perplexity
over beyng and is the ground of the conclusive abandonment
of beings by being. The difference between beings and being is shunted
into the harmlessness of a merely represented ("logical") distinction,
provided metaphysics comes to know at all of this distinction itself as
such, which, strictly speaking, metaphysics does not and cannot do.
For metaphysical thinking indeed abides only in this distinction but
such that in a certain sense being itself is understood as a kind of
being. Only the transition to the other beginning, the first overcoming
of metaphysics (under the transitional necessity of retaining its name),
raises this distinction to the level of knowledge and thereby places it
into question for the first time-not casually, but as what is most question-
worthy. No matter how extrinsically this distinction is first introduced
as the "ontological difference," even if entirely in the sense of
representational thinking, still it is necessary to start to meditate on
the distinction. For this apparently trifling and harmless "ontological"
difference (Le., the one on which ontology rests) must make visible
the original riches, as well as the danger of all dangers, of human
being, namely, the danger of the grounding and destroying of the essence
of human being. This difference is the most prominent guise of
the space of the highest venture assigned to human thinking.
This difference gathers up the essence of metaphysics into the occurrence
that is decisive in metaphysics but is never decided by it and
cannot be decided through it. The difference carries the concealed history
of metaphysics (not the historiology of metaphysical doctrines)
over to the history of beyng and moves this latter history into the effective
space of the first beginning of the Western thinking of being, a
thinking which bears the name "philosophy." Yet the concept of philosophy
changes according to the mode of questioning being.
259. Philosophy
Philosophy is the questioning of being. This characterization can be
interpreted in two ways, which in their unity contain the essence of
previous and of future philosophy and thus include a reference to the
transition from the one to the other.
336 VIII. [424-426J
The questioning of being is at first merely the question of the
of beings, and is so throughout the long history from Anaximander
to Nietzsche. This question is directed at beings as that which is asked
about, and the question asks for what they are. What is asked for is
determined as that which is common to all beings. Being has the
character of beingness. Within the questioning that proceeds from
beings and asks back into them, beingness proves to be something
supplementary to beings. Within the asked-about and the asked-for,
however, beingness as most constantly present in all beings is that
which is most eminently and therefore that which is in each case
earlier in relation 10 every determinate individual being. As soon as
beingness is conceived as an object of representation, and representation
is conceived as representation to oneself, i.e, conceived with respect
to the subjectum, to be earlier is then assigned to a different
order and becomes the apriori in the order of representing. Because
this representing, too, concerns the presentifying of the objectively
present as such, even here to be earlier refers not to a priority in the
order of cornman "time," but to a temporal priority with respect to
presencing. Yet it is not the case that this apriori is for the Greeks
"still" something "objective" and since Descartes something "subjective."
It is neither the one nor the other. Instead, the rrpon:pov Tn
<pucrEt, precisely in the sense of <pUcrl<;, i.e., in the sense of being (as
e-mergence [an-wesend] into presence), "is" itself, just as beingness
remains what is most eminently.
Ever since Descartes, however, the apriori is not "subjective" but
precisely "objective," and it bears the objectivity of the object, the
standing over and against of what so stands in the representing and
for the one who does the representing. Only if the subjectum is misinterpreted
as an individual present-at-hand I-thing, and representation,
instead of remaining the essence of this I-thing, is degraded to
an extant property, only then can the "apriori" (beingness in the
sense of objectivity) be misunderstood subjectively as what is
"merely" subjective. As great as Kant's advance might have been, as
immense as might be the difference between the absolute idealism of
post-Kantian philosophy and Kant himself, and as confusedly as
everything then sinks down into the mediocrity and groundlessness
of the "logical" and "biological" interpretation of the apriori and in
this form reappears in Nietzsche, yet all these differences cannot
hide the simple unity of the entire history of this questioning of
being (a questioning of beingness in the form of the question, what
are beings?). The history of this question of being is the history of
metaphysics, i.e., of the thinking that thinks being as the being of
beings, departing from beings and returning back to them. The fact that
§259 [426-427] 337
this questioning of being is overpowered by beings not only in its
beginning (which is the reason for the disempowerment of <pucn<; and
&:Meaa) but also that this priority of beings extends throughout the
history of metaphysics, as essential to metaphysics, can be seen most
strikingly where the question of being was carried out in the purest
way since the time of the Greeks, namely, in Kant. The postulation
of experience as the only normative domain of beings is in unity
with the disclosure of the transcendental. Beingness as the "condition
of the possibility" of the object of experience and experience itself
are for their part conditioned by the priority of beings as the
norm for what is supposed to count as being [Sein]. In Kant's transcendental
questioning, beings ("nature") are indeed seen in the
light of Newtonian physics, but they are intended metaphysically (in
terms of metaphysical history) in the sense of the <puGa ov and ultimately
in the sense of <pUG1<;. Absolute idealism seems to overcome
the priority of beings, for the exclusive determination of the object on
the basis of objectivity (Le., the elimination of the "thing-in-itself")
signifies nothing other than the establishment of the priority of beingness
over beings. Therefore, it is indeed impossible, for instance,
to follow Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit precisely in its beginning
("sense certainty") unless the incorporation of the sensible object
into the actuality of absolute spirit is already thought in advance and
absolutely. What else could this mean but that beings have lost their
priority over being? This interpretation would nevertheless amount
to a downright misunderstanding of idealism, for even idealism adheres
to the priority of beings over beingness and merely covers over
this relation while seeming to reverse it. Every objectivity, on every
one of its levels, is indeed determined on the basis of the absolute. Yet
objectivity as such is already, according to its essence (passing over in
silence its provenance from the historicality of being), not only related
to the object but also determined from the object as from a determinate
interpretation of beings on the basis of a starting point
within beings themselves. Through sublation into absolute knowledge,
objectivity seems to disappear, but it is merely extended into
the objectivity of self-consciousness and of reason. Precisely this,
that beingness is grounded in absolute subjectivity, shows very well
that this being, the subjectum, as relational center of all representing
to oneself, decides over beingness, over what can pertain to beingness,
as well as over the levels and essential forms of representedness.
Thus we see that absolute idealism (versus the Greeks) accords an
even greater priority to beings over beingness, inasmuch as beyng is
determined on the basis of the subject, which means, at the same
time, on the basis of the object. In terms of the historicality of being,
338 VIII. [427-428]
this determination is merely a variation of constant presence, which
now becomes representedness to a subjectum. Therefore absolute idealism,
though it seems to dissolve everything into being, actually carries
out the complete disempowerment of being in favor of an undisputed
and limitless empowerment of beings.
Only the philosophical naivete of "epistemology" and the "epistemological"
interpretation of idealism were able to give rise to the
erroneous view that "idealism" is far from reality and needs to be
rectified through a reversion to "realism." The "realism" of the nineteenth
century in fact lives entirely off absolute idealism. No reversion
is carried out, but only a submersion into an unphilosophical
interpretation of idealism. Thereby, admittedly, the disempowerment
of being [Sein] concealed in idealism seems to be justified
through the concern with beings. This concern must then redeem
itself through notions of value wherever it retains enough presence
of mind to recognize that even the unconditioned affirmation of reality
and of "life" (and thus of beings) still requires a trace of nonbeings,
though indeed nonbeings can no longer be acknowledged as
being [Sein]. If the "consideration" of the history of metaphysics retains
the perspectives of "idealism" and "realism," then "idealism"
will always seem to be the philosophically more genuine posture,
inasmuch as it still speaks of being, over and against beings. Nevertheless,
it remains the case that in "idealism" the philosophical (and
in realism the unphilosophical) dis empowerment of being is carried
out. That must be recognized so as not to misinterpret forthwith the
transition from metaphysics to the other mode of questioning being.
The question of being is now becoming the question of the truth
of beyng. The essence of truth is now interrogated out of the essential
occurrence of beyng and is grasped as the clearing of what is selfconcealing
and thus as belonging to the essence of beyng itself. The
question of the truth "of" beyng reveals itself as the question of the
beyng "of" truth. (The genitive is here an idiosyncratic one and could
never be captured by the previous, "grammatical" genitive.) The
questioning of beyng now no longer thinks on the basis of beings;
instead, as an inventive thinking of beyng (d. Beyng, 265. The inventive
thinking of beyng), it is compelled by beyng itself. The inventive
thinking of beyng leaps into beyng as the "between" in whose selfclearing
essential occurrence the gods and humans come to mutual
recognition, i.e., decide about their mutual belonging. As this "between,"
beyng "is" not a supplement to beings, but is what essentially
occurs such that in its truth they (beings) can first attain the preservation
proper to beings. This priority of the "between," however,
must not be misinterpreted idealistically in the sense of the "apriori."
[428-430] 339
The questioning of being in the mode of questioning the truth of
beyng no longer comes to pass on a plane in which a distinction like
the one between idealism and realism could possibly be grounded.
Admittedly, there remains the misgiving as to whether it is indeed
possible to think beyng itself in its essential occurrence without taking
beings as the point of departure, i.e., whether all questioning of
being must not remain inescapably a questioning back from beings.
Here, in fact, the long tradition of metaphysics and the resulting habit
of thinking stand in the way, especially if "logic," itself a descendant
of the inceptual disempowerment of being and of truth, is still reputed
a heavenly descended, absolute judge of thinking. For it is then
"logically," i.e., definitively, settled that being, as what is general,
comes to be acquired on the basis of beings even when the attempt is
made to secure being in its constancy in the manner of beings.
Beyng, which must be inventively thought in its truth, "is" nevertheless
not that which is general and empty; instead, beyng essentially
occurs as what is unique and abyssal, that in which something nonrepeatable
in history is decided (d. Beyng, 270. The essence of beyng
(essential occurrence)). To be sure, we cannot remain standing on
the soil of the metaphysical question of being and from that standpoint
demand a knowledge which by its very essence includes the
abandonment of that standpoint, i.e., includes the spatialization of a
space and the temporalization of a time which were indeed not only
forgotten in the history of metaphysics or insufficiently pondered but
are inaccessible to this history and even not necessary to it.
To abandon the standpoint of metaphysics means nothing else than
to be subject to a compelling that arises out of a very different plight,
one which was assuredly brought about by the history of metaphysics
in such a way that it withdraws as the plight it actually is and allows
the lack of a sense of plight (with regard to being and the question of
being) to become the predominant condition. In truth, however, the
lack of a sense of plight is the extreme form of this plight and can be
recognized above all as the abandonment of beings by being.
In the transition from the metaphysical question of being to the
future one, thinking and questioning must always remain transitional.
Thereby the possibility of a merely metaphysical critique of the
other questioning is excluded. Yet the other questioning is not then
ipso facto proven to be "absolute" truth, as can already be seen in the
fact that a proof of such "truth" runs counter to the very essence of this
questioning. For this questioning is historical and is so because in it
the history of beyng itself as the history of the unique and most abyssal
ground of history becomes an event. Moreover, transitional thinking
always accomplishes in the first place the preparation for the other
340 VIII. Beyng [430-431J
questioning, the preparation for that humanity which, as what
grounds and acts as steward, must first be strong enough and knowledgeable
enough to receive the long-adumbrated but even-Iongerrefused
thrust of beyng and to gather the empowerment of beyng into
the essential occurrence of beyng in a unique moment of history.
Therefore, transitional thinking cannot simply rid itself of the metaphysical
tradition through an arbitrary stroke. Indeed, just to be able
to communicate, it must often still tread the paths of metaphysical
thinking and yet must constantly know the other. How could genuinely
historical thinking also fail to see that if the transition is to be
historically grounding, it must be open to the suddenness of the unanticipated
as well as to the unobtrusiveness of a slow self-surpassing?
And how could transitional thinking also not know that much, indeed
most, of what it has to strive for will one day be superfluous and will
revert into the incidental so as to let the stream of the history of what
is unique take its non repeatable course? Nevertheless, transitional
thinking must not shrink back from the meagerness of preparatory
distinctions and clarifications when they are merely wafted along by
the wind of a decision that takes place from far away. Only the cool
boldness of thinking and the dark errancy of questioning lend ardor
and light to the fire of beyng.
The distinction in the question of being, a historical distinction that
separates the history of metaphysics from future thinking, designates
the first unfolding of the transition. Yet this distinction does not connect
in the manner of setting off something past from something future,
an elapsed history from one that is still to come; instead, it distinguishes
two fundamentally different currents ever flowing deep within
Western history itself. That the history of metaphysics is (with Nietzsche)
at an end does not at all mean that from now on metaphysical (i.e.,
also rationalistic, logical) thinking will be eliminated. On the contrary,
this thinking now transfers its fixed habits to the realms of
worldviews and of the ever-increasing encroachment of science onto
the everyday bustling about with things. In the same way, it has already
entrenched itself in the structuring of Christianity and passes
over, along with Christian notions, into the forms of their "secularization."
Within these forms, this thinking again encounters itself in the
configuration it assumed through its own Christianization (already
begun with Plato). The history of metaphysics does not cease, for it now
passes over into, and indeed first opens up, that which lacks history.
Conversely, the thinking of the historicality of being, the thinking
characteristic of the other questioning, does not now simply step into
the light of day. It remains concealed in its own depths-now no longer
(as occurred since the first beginning of Western thinking and during
§259 [431-433] 341
the entire history of metaphysics) through the concealment of its seclusion
in the unbroached origin but through the clarity of a heavy darkness
pertaining to a depth that knows itself and arises in meditation.
The history of metaphysical thinking, and also of the thinking of the
historicality of being, eventuates at once in the different eras of these
ways of thinking and in accord with different powers of the priority of
being over beings, of beings over being, of the confusion of both, and of
the dissolution of every priority in the era of the calculable understandability
of everything. We know the future of the history of being,
namely, that if it wishes to remain history, then beyng itself must appropriate
thinking to itself. But no one knows the form of the beings to
come. Only this can be known with certainty: every inventive thinking
of beyng and all creating out of the truth of beyng, without the already
protecting comfort of beings, require other powers of questioning and
speaking, of projecting and bearing, than the ones the history of metaphysics
could ever bring forth. For these other thinkers must still incorporate
into thinking, along with what is most proper to them, the questioning
dialogue with the first beginning and with its history, as these
have emerged in bright depth, and must be equipped to become, along
with the most solitary ones of the first thinking, even more solitary ones
of the abyss which in the other beginning not only bears all grounds but
also suffuses them. The history of metaphysical thinking in its "works,"
a history that for those who merely follow remains an object of historiological
erudition and research and, at the end, of sheer pedantic instruction,
must first become a history in which all things gather into their
uniqueness and which, as a light-ray of thinking, radiates a truth of
beyng into the latter's own untraversed space. Because beyng itself here
compels a greatness of thoughtful Dasein, whose form we can scarcely
surmise from the poetic existence of H6lderlin and from the horrid
wandering of Nietzsche, and because only this greatness still resides in
the space of the thinking of the historicality of being (and, because of
this, even the talk of greatness remains too small), therefore the preparation
for such thinkers must gather up everything that is unrelenting
and must move amid the clearest distinctions. The reason is that only
such distinctions bestow the courage needed for steadfastness in the
domain wherein that which is most question-worthy thrusts forth,
namely, that which is needed by the gods and forgotten by humans and
which we call beyng.
The distinction in the question of being may be captured by formulas
in two ways: "being and thinking" and "being and time." In
the first formula, being is understood as the beingness of beings; in
the second, as that whose truth is interrogated. In the first, "thinking"
means the guideline for questioning beings with regard to their
342 VIII. Beyng [433-434]
beingness; it means representational assertion, In the second, "time"
is the initial indication of the essence of truth in the sense of the
open (by way of transport) clearing of the field in which beyng conceals
itself and in so doing first bestows itself explicitly in its truth.
Accordingly, the relation between the two formulas must by no
means be interpreted in the sense that the second merely replaces
the "thinking" of the first with "time," as if the same question of the
beingness of beings were henceforth to be carried out under the
guideline of time instead of assertorial representation. "Time" would
thereby be thought immediately, according to its ordinary concept.
Instead, the "role" of thinking and that of "time" is in each case fundamentally
different. The specificity of these roles gives the "and" in
each of the formulas its own unique character. By the same token,
however, the questioning of being in the sense of the formula "being
and time" makes it possible to grasp more originarily (Le., to grasp in
terms of the historicality of being) the history of the question of
being in the sense of the formula "being and thinking." Likewise,
that which is necessarily unquestioned in the history of metaphysics,
namely, the truth of being in the temporal character of being, could
then be made visible by reference to the prevailing of presence and
constancy in the essence of <pual~, {8£0:, and ovalO:. With regard to the
historicality of being, this reference is all the more decisive since the
temporal character of beingness is covered over more and more in
the further history of the question of being, such that the attempt to
link, in any way whatever, being (and the timelessness of categories
and values) with "time" strikes at once against a resistance which
naturally draws its power only from the blindness of the desire to
avoid questioning. Because the "time" -character of being itself remains
completely strange, due to an inability to grasp the question of
the truth (the "meaning") of beyng, one seeks a way out by identifying
being with Dasein, and the latter, as in some way designating the
human being, now becomes understandable in its "temporality."
Thereby, however, everything has been deflected from the path of
the question of being, thus proving that a formula in itself can do
nothing if the effort and knowledge are lacking for interpreting it at
least in its aim. Yet this knowledge can never be communicated and
distributed in the manner of cognitions of objectively present things.
Already in the transition, those who bring the knowledge to each
other need to proceed in such a way that they surmise decisions and
approach one another but do not meet, for dispersed individuals are
required if the decision is to be allowed to mature.
These individuals still bring with them, however, the past of the
concealed history of being, that detour (as it may seem) metaphysics
§259 [434-435] 343
had to take through beings so as not to attain being and thus to come
to an end which is strong enough for the plight leading toward the
other beginning. This beginning at the same time leads back into the
originariness of the first beginning and transforms the past into something
not lost.
The detour, however, must not be understood in the sense that an
immediate or shorter path to beyng had been missed. Indeed, it is
this detour which first leads into the plight of the refusal and into the
necessity of bringing up for decision that which (cpu(Jt<;, aA~eEW:) in
the first beginning was only the intimation of a bestowal and did not
allow itself to be grasped and preserved.
Belonging to the genuine transition are, above all, courage for the
old and freedom for the new. The old is not the archaic, which inevitably
struts about as soon as the greatness of the beginning (which is
incomparable as the greatness of the first beginning) falls into historiological
tradition and disavowal. The old, i.e., that which cannot be
surpassed in essentiality by anything younger, manifests itself only
in historical confrontation and meditation. Furthermore, the new is
not the "modern," namely, that which is currently in vogue and
thereby gains validity and favor and yet remains the hidden and selfunaware
foe of everything decisive. Instead, the new refers here to
the freshness of the originariness of re-beginning, that which ventures
out into the concealed future of the first beginning and thus
cannot at all be "new" but must be even older than the old.
The transitional and essentially ambiguous thinkers must also
know explicitly that their questioning and speaking are not understandable
to our times (the duration of which cannot be calculated).
That is not because our contemporaries are too deficient in cleverness
or too little informed for what is said but because understandability
already signifies the destruction of their thinking. For understandability
compels everything back into the sphere of the previous
representations. The mission of the transitional thinkers is to take
those who so "feverishly" desire "understandability" and make of
them non-knowers, ones who do not yet know, who do not already
know the "whereto," because they have accomplished the first necessary
step: not to expect truth from beings without falling prey to
doubt and despair. Those who do not yet know, who have not yet
secured for themselves agreement about everything but have indeed
preserved for questioning that which is first and unique, beyng, are
the inceptual wanderers, ones who originate from the furthest away
and thus bear in themselves the highest future.
The transitional thinkers must ultimately know what all insistence
upon understandability especially fails to realize, that no thinking of
344 VIII. Beyng [435-436 J
being. no philosophy, could ever be verified by "facts." i.e .• by beings.
To make itself understandable is suicide for philosophy. The idolizers
of "facts" never realize that their idols shine only in a borrowed light.
They are indeed not supposed to realize that. for it would immediately
make them perplexed and. accordingly. useless. But idolizers and idols
are used only when the gods are absconding and so are announcing
their nearness.
The disentanglement of philosophy from the snares binding it to the
grounding of science. to the interpretation of culture. to serving worldviews,
and to metaphysics as its proper first essence (which deteriorates
into its distortion) is merely the consequence of the other beginning, and
only as such a consequence can it truly be mastered. The other beginning
is the more original appropriation of the concealed essence of philosophy,
an essence which itself arises out of the essence of beyng and
which, according to the specific purity of the origin, remains closer to
the essence of decision pertaining to the thinking "of" beyng.
The disentanglement then has as its consequence a necessary
change in the usual way of representing what philosophy is. precisely
within the sphere of the always persistent everyday opinion. namely.
no longer an edifice of thinking but the apparently random bestrewal
of blocks quarried from the bedrock, with the chisels and crowbars
remaining invisible. Are the blocks secluded configurations or disjoined
pieces for holding up an invisible bridge? Who could know
that?
Philosophy. in the other beginning, questions by way of asking for
the truth of beyng. Seen from the horizon of the now explicit difference
between beings and being and calculated on the basis of a historiological
comparison to metaphysics and its starting point in beings.
the questioning in the other beginning (the thinking of the
historicality of beyng) might look like a simple inversion, i.e., here, a
crude one. Yet it is precisely the thinking of the historicality of beyng
which knows, from the essence of mere inversion, that in such a
procedure the most inflexible and insidious enslavement is at work
and that the inversion does not overcome anything; it merely brings
the inverted into power all the more and provides the inverted with
a previously lacking entrenchment and completeness.
The questioning of beyng out of the historicality of beyng is not an
inversion of metaphysics; it is instead a de-cision as the projection of
the ground of that difference to which even the inversion must adhere.
Such projection brings this questioning altogether outside of
that difference between beings and being. This questioning therefore
now even writes being as "beyng," which is supposed to indicate that
being is here no longer thought metaphysically.
§259 [437-438] 345
Out of its necessity and in an anticipatory interpretation, the
thinking of the historicality of beyng can be made question-worthy in
four ways:
1. On the basis of the gods.
2. On the basis of the human being.
3. With regard to the history of metaphysics.
4. As the thinking "of" beyng.
Only in appearance can these four viewpoints be followed up independently
of one another.
Regarding 1. To grasp the thinking of beyng on the basis of the gods
will immediately seem arbitrary and "fantastic," insofar as on the one
hand it means in general to proceed without hesitation from the divine,
as if that were "given" and everyone agreed about it, and insofar
as on the other hand it means still more outlandishly to proceed from
"gods," as if a "polytheism" were postulated as the "point of departure"
for philosophy. To speak of the "gods" does of course not mean that a
decision has been made here affirming the existence of many gods
instead of one; rather, it is meant to indicate the undecidability of the
being of gods, whether one or many. This undecidability carries within
it the question of whether something like being can be attributed to
gods at all without destroying everything divine. To speak of "the
gods" is to name the undecidability as to whether a god, and which
god, could arise once again as an extreme plight for which essence of
the human being in which way. Yet this undecidability is not represented
as the mere empty possibility of decisions; instead, it is to be
grasped in advance as the decision from which originates either what
has been decided or complete undecidedness. The thinking in advance,
as abiding in this decision with regard to such undecidability,
does not presuppose the existence of any gods whatever; instead, it
ventures into the domain of that question for which the answer can
come only from what is question-worthy itself, never from the questioner.
This fact, that such anticipatory thinking denies beyng to "the
gods" in advance, means that every assertion about the "being" and
"essence" of gods not only says nothing about them, i.e., about that
which is to be decided, but also dissimulates something objective, on
which all thinking founders because it is immediately driven astray.
(A metaphysical consideration must represent God as the highest being,
as the first ground and cause of beings, as the un-conditioned, the infinite,
the absolute. All these determinations arise not from what is
godly about God but from the essence of beings as such, insofar as this
essence, conceived purely and simply in itself as constant presence and
objectivity and as what is clearest in representational explanation, is
attributed to God as ob-ject.)
346 VIII.
The denial of being to "the gods" means at first only that being does
not stand "above" the gods and that they also do not stand "above"
being. Yet "the gods" indeed need beyng, and in this declaration the essence
"of" beyng is already thought. "The gods" do not need beyng as
their proper domain, in which they themselves find a place to stand.
"The gods" require beyng so that through beyng, which does not belong
to them, they might indeed belong to themselves. Beyng is that which
is required by the gods; it is their need, and the neededness of beyng
names its essential occurrence, which is necessitated by "the gods" but
is never what can be caused or conditioned. The circumstance that "the
gods" require beyng moves them into the abyss (freedom) and expresses
the failure of all founding and proving. As obfuscated as the neededness
of beyng still remains for thinking, this neededness nevertheless provides
a first foothold for thinking "the gods" as the ones that need beyng.
We thereby take the first steps into the history of beyng, the thinking of
the historicality of beyng thus first gets under way, and every effort to
force what is said in this commencement into an ordinary understandability
is otiose and, above all, opposed to this kind of thinking. Now, if
beyng is what is needed by the god, and beyng itself finds its truth only
in the inventive thinking which is philosophy (in the other beginning),
then "the gods" are in need of the thinking of the historicality of beyng,
i.e., they need philosophy. It is not as if they themselves had to philosophize
for the sake of their own divinization; instead, it is because there
must be philosophy if "the gods" are once again to come into decision
and if history is to attain its essential ground. As determined on the
basis of the gods, the thinking of the historicality of beyng is that thinking
of beyng which grasps the abyss of the neededness of beyng as what
is first and never seeks the essence of beyng in what is godly itself as that
which supposedly is most eminently. The thinking of the historicality of
beyng stands outside every theology and is equally removed from any
atheism, whether in the sense of a "worldview" or of a doctrine having
some other character.
To grasp the abyss of the neededness of beyng means to be transposed
into the necessity of grounding the truth for beyng and not to
resist the essential consequences of this necessity but, instead, to
think toward them and thereby to know, without playing into the
hands of the claim to "absoluteness," that that necessity withdraws
all thinking of beyng from every merely human arrangement.
To grasp on the basis of the gods the thinking of the historicality
of beyng is, however, "the same" as the attempt at an indication of
the essence of this thinking on the basis of the human being.
Regarding 2. It is the case here as well that no already extant, customary
view of the human being can serve as the point of departure,
§259 [439-441] 347
because what the necessity of thinking in its neededness first requires
must fulfill itself in an essential transformation of the human
being up to now. Why?
If we think of the essence of the human being decisively enough,
even in the determination that has been customary for centuries,
i.e., as animal rationale, then we cannot fail to think of the relation to
being that long ago became stale and empty, the relation still intended
in speaking of the "rationality" of this living being. In view of
the rapidly increasing perplexity over the "metaphysical" essence of
reason, the way out might seem to be the last, definitive procedure
of Nietzsche, namely, to "reduce" "reason" (and everything which,
under different labels, moves in the sphere of this "property" of such
a living being) to "life." With corroboration from the spirit of what is
self-evident and is easily proved, the declaration might be ventured
to the effect that reason is a mere epiphenomenon of "life" and therefore
a later addition, and this way of thinking might thus be completely
expanded into the ordinary mode of representation common
to all. Even so, nothing would be changed with regard to the essentiality
of "reason" in the sense of the apprehending of the being of
beings. To be sure, all these prioritizings of "life" themselves collapse
into nothingness, unless that which is "dependent" on "life," such as
reason, nevertheless in itself bears and dominates the essence of the
human being, namely, that this being, in the midst of beings and
comporting itself to them as beings, is a being and is indeed the being.
That is how the modern determination as subjectum conceives of the
human being. As much as this determination might have appealed
in the subsequent era to "life," it is still the strongest-but correspondingly
ever more blind-testimony to the metaphysical essence of
the human being, which all happenings of "life" and every institution
of the "world" urge us to forget and to keep forgotten.
On the other hand, if being, though unrecognized, now provides
the ground for the essence of reason and is nothing arbitrary but,
instead, could itself, in its essential occurrence, radically claim the
human being, and if humans were to regain in another originariness
their own thoroughly used up and splintered essence, and if even
this regaining of the essence had to consist in being claimed by the
essential occurrence of beyng, and if beyng itself could ground the
truth of its essence only in such a transformation of humans, a transformation
which could be ventured by an original thinking "of"
beyng, then a transformed thinking of being is announced here on
the basis of the human being. Yet it also becomes clear immediately
that this determining of philosophy on the basis of the human being
never intends "the" human being as such but the historical human
348 VIII. Beyng [441-442]
being, whose history is surely hidden to us but is indeed common
and pressing in historiological representation.
260. The gigantic
was determined as that whereby the ""quantitative" is transformed into
a "quality" of its own, into a kind of greatness. The gigantic is thus not
something quantitative that commences when a relatively high number
is attained (through enumeration and measurement), although it
can indeed appear first and foremost as "quantitative." The gigantic is
grounded in the decisiveness and exceptionlessness of "calculation"
and is rooted in a reaching out of subjective representation to the whole
of beings. Residing therein is the possibility of a kind of greatness, one
which is meant here in the historical (historiological) sense. Greatness
refers here to the self-rooted erecting of beyng in a self-grounded
ground out of which must arise anything that wishes to count as a
being. The gigantic manifests the greatness of the subjectum which is
certain of itself and which builds everything upon its own representing
and producing.
The gigantic appears in many forms; above all, it does not leap into
view immediately and "overwhelmingly" in each of those forms.
That whose representation demands vast numbers and measures is
only the semblance of the gigantic, though it does admittedly belong
to it, since the gigantic brings into play the kind of greatness which
relies essentially on positing and representing.
Numbered among the forms of the gigantic are:
1. The gigantic retardation of history (as the remaining absent of essential
decisions, up to the complete absence of history) in the
semblance of the rapidity and controllability of "historiological"
development and of its anticipations.
2. The gigantic publicness of the uniting of everything interrelated,
along with the concealment of the destroying and undermining of
every passion for essential gathering.
3. The gigantic claim of naturalness in the semblance of what is selfevident
and "logical"; the question-worthiness of being [Sein] put
completely out of question.
4. The gigantic diminution of beings as a whole in the semblance of
their boundless expansion through unconditional control over
them. The only impossibility is the word "impossible" and the
very notion of it.
Occurring essentially in all these interconnected forms of the gigantic
is the abandonment of beings by being, and indeed no longer merely
§261 [442-443] 349
in the mode of the remaining absent of the question-worthiness of beings
but also in the guise of an institutionalized expulsion of all meditation
on account of the unconditional priority of "action" (Le., the calculative
and always "large-scale" bustling about) and of "facts."
The gigantic unfolds in the calculative and thus always brings the
"quantitative" into prominence but is itself a denial of the truth of
beyng in favor of the "rational" and the "given" inasmuch as the gigantic
is the unconditioned predominance of representation and production.
Yet this denial is not master of itself and, precisely in the highest
self-certainty, does not ever know itself. The gigantic brings about the
completion of the basic metaphysical position of the human being, a
position which proceeds to invert its form and to interpret all "goals"
and "values" ("ideals" and "ideas") as the "expression" and offspring of
mere "eternal" "life" in itself. The foremost appearances of the gigantic
are supposed to allow this "origin" in "life" to be represented as vividly
as possible, Le., to firmly establish this origin historiologically for the
era of the gigantic and to confirm this era to itself in its "vitality." No
matter whether "values" and "goals" are posited by "reason" or arise
out of the "instinct" of "natural" and "healthy" life in itself, what is
unfolding here throughout is the subjectum (human being) at the center
of beings, specifically such that all forms of cultural and political
configuration bring the gigantic to power in the same way and with
equal necessity, carryon the historiological calculation of history and
the miscalculation of history as ways of concealing the absence of
goals and also secure everywhere, unobtrusively and unconsciously,
the avoidance of essential decisions.
The gigantic shows that every kind of "greatness" in history arises
from the implicit "metaphysical" interpretation of occurrences (ideals,
actions, creations, sacrifices) and therefore is not of a properly
historical essence but is merely historiological. The concealed history
of beyng is unacquainted with what is "great" and "small" in terms
of calculation and instead knows "only" what is decided, undecided,
and decisionless with respect to beyng.
261. Views ofbeyng
Beyng-who bothers about beyng? Everyone chases after beings.
How is it even possible to bother about beyng? Where beyng does still
occur, it is only as some "being" or other, about which we do not need to
be bothered, supposing that bother may serve as the decisive criterion
for what is and what ought to be. Even if the concession is finally granted
that being "is" not a being, it remains an empty "representation," a
350 VIII. Beyng [443-445]
bringing before oneself that brings nothing forward, an exorbitant representation
possible at any time, everywhere, on any occasion, and over
and against every being, and so in relation to beings is simply that which
is most common to everything that can be considered a being. Thus it is
a "nullity." In the end, being counts only as a name, one which no longer
names anything and yet is still used as a sign for the most negligible
of all beings.
This view [Meinung] of beyng does not need to provide extensive
proofs of its correctness. It finds its best confirmation in those attempts
which (perhaps indeed standing in opposition to this view,
though still entirely shackled to its perspective) would like to provide
this empty name with the littlest bit of fullness. Beings, in the sense
of the objectively present at hand, are taken to be unassailable and
unquestionable, and the most appropriate way of relating to them
occurs when the present at hand becomes entirely and utterly ready
to hand and the latter is established in a completely technical sense.
Beings are taken in this way, and being is conceded only as something
that can merely be intended [meinbar] in "thought." Being then
shows itself precisely as this that is most general.
Why do we not make a concerted effort for once to unsettle these
admittedly most common "presuppositions," ones "pre"-posited furthest
in advance (namely, that beings are what is objective and that the
grasping of beyng is an empty intending of what is most general and of
its categories)? It is because we recognize only with the greatest difficulty
what that requires. It requires the unsettling of this "we," i.e., the
unsettling of the human being of the modern era, who, as subjectum, has
become the stronghold of those presuppositions, indeed in such a way
that the very character of the human being as subject has its origin and
the support of its unbroken power in the conceded predominance of
those presuppositions (ones that concern the understanding of being
[Sein] entrenched in the modern West). How is there supposed to occur
such an unsettling, which would have to be essentially more than a
mere change of view with regard to the concept of beyng within a "subject"
whose further action is otherwise undisturbed? An examination
of those "presuppositions" shows clearly that not to bother about beyng
is justified at all times and especially when it magnanimously relegates
the concern with being to the conceptual quibbling of the "ontology"
again carried out in the schools, or, equivalently, when it agrees with
the view that declares impossible every "ontology" as a "rationalization"
of being. For, with this either-or, to decide about being and about the
view of being, in each case on the basis of ontology, is self-evidently to
decide in such a way that "particular" necessities for deciding can
scarcely (and indeed for good reason) still be found and conceded here.
§261 [445-446] 351
Why then do we still pay any heed at all to this ontologically structured
not bothering about being? Certainly not in order to bring up for
discussion, or even to modify, the respective views and doctrines of
beyng as well as the various objections that have been raised against
them. The point is rather to steer meditation toward the circumstance
that all of the customary views of being (including the ontologies and
the anti-ontologies) themselves originate from the dominance of being
and of its determinate, historical "truth." (In anti-ontology, the indifference
toward the question of being is carried to an extreme.)
Imminent here is another misunderstanding, namely, the conception
according to which the "anthropological" presupposition of that
view of being should be "exhibited," whereby such a demonstration
would "refute" the view. This conception, however, is precisely no
more than a further consequence of that view of being.
Indeed, "anthropology" belongs together with that which stands
under the dominance of such an interpretation of being. "Anthropology"
can therefore never be claimed as an argument against that
interpretation-passing over in silence the fact that the demonstration
of some "presuppositions" or other on which a view is based decides
nothing about its "truth" and that in general presuppositions as such
are not yet an objection.
What matters is something else: to recognize in the not bothering
about beyng a necessary state in which is concealed a preeminent
phase of the history of beyng itself and to hear, in this perhaps most
negligible of all incidents amid the proceedings of today, the resonating
of the decisive event.
Meditation must strike up against the fact that the indifference with
regard to being, which is already delivered into complete harmlessness
and which is "represented" in the schools by "ontology," is nothing less
than the highest amplification of the power of calculation. The most indifferent
and blindest denial of the incalculable is at work here.
Meditation will not take this as a "mistake" or an "omission"
which would simply need to be rebuked but as history, one whose
"reality" essentially surpasses everything that is otherwise "real."
Therefore, this history is recognized by very few, and among them
the rarest alone grasp it as the event which already opens itself and
in which the truth of beings as a whole is decided.
Incidents amid beings cannot lead-and certainly cannot lead the
human being of the modern era-into the realm of the truth of
beyng. Yet nothing is more essential than to recognize the state of
Western history in which we already stand as the decisive state, one
we do not only cover over through the lack of a decision regarding
that indifferent view, but also one we heighten with respect to the
352 VIII. [446-447]
decision with which it is pregnant, such that meditation and lack of
meditation are already incorporated into the decision and indeed can
no longer be considered forms of an accidental observation which
just happens to supervene or to absent itself.
This is the place where beyng itself, in virtue of its history, compels
the knowledge of being into the plight of a decisional necessity
and forces this knowledge to clarify to itself what might happen in it
as the "projection" of being.
262. The "projection" ofbeyng and beyng as projection
The thoughtful leap "into" the truth of beyng must at the same time
leap into the essence of truth and must establish itself, and become
steadfast in the throwing of a projection.
For experiencing beings and for sheltering their truth, the "projection"
is merely a preliminary which then is surpassed in the progression
to that which can be built and preserved in the projected domain
and which, as preservation, receives the seal of beyng.
In thoughtful knowledge, the projection is not a preliminary for
something else; instead, it is the unique, the last, and thus the rarest,
which in itself essentially occurs as the grounded truth of beyng.
Here the projection is not, so to speak, merely laid "over" beings, not
a "perspective" that is merely offered them. For every per-spective already
claims what persists throughout the way for its line of sight. Precisely
this, that above all and deciding everything, a fissure spreads all
the way through what then for the first time announces itself as a
"being" in the open, that an errancy, in clearing, snatches into itself
everything to make what is true possible-that is what the thoughtful
projection of beyng has to accomplish. "Accomplish"? To be sure;
but not as a fabricating or devising in the sense of an unrestrained
contriving.
The projection of beyng can be thrown only by beyng itself, and
for this to occur a moment of that which is ap-propriated by beyng as
appropriating event, i.e., a moment of Da-sein, must be successful.
Thoughtful and explorative questioning: the renunciation that takes
action, that adheres to the refusal and thus brings it into the light.
Whoever wants to be granted a glimpse of the history of beyng
and should experience how beyng remains absent from its own essential
space and allows its distortion to occupy this space for a long
time (a distortion that propels the spread of "beings") in order to
preserve for the essence even the distorted essence (which indeed
does belong to the essence), such a person must be able to see, in the
§262 [447-449] 353
first place, that projections are thrown into that which, thanks to the
clearing provided by the projections, afterwards becomes a being and
allows beyng only as a mere supplement to itself, a supplement contrived
through "abstraction."
It is immediately customary for us to think of these projections as
forms of representation which make possible an encounter with objects:
the transcendental condition of Kant. Indeed, we do well to practice
thinking of beings as such with regard to this interpretation of beingness
as objectivity. Nevertheless, this Kantian interpretation stands on
the "ground" of the subjectum and resides in the sphere of representation.
The "projection" becomes characterized as "subjective" in the best
sense-i.e., not "egoistic" or "subjectivistic" in the epistemological sense
but "subjective" in the metaphysical sense of subjectum-as that which
lies at the ground, is unquestioned, and is unworthy of question. The
interpretation of Kant's thought can here gain essential clarity and can
then lead us to see that, even with this position of the subject, philosophical
thinking does not make it past (schematism and transcendental
imagination) the abysses. Yet we would already need to have become
questioners with respect to other domains, so as not to mis-characterize
this conception of Kant as an exaggerated peculiarity but so as to take
seriously this reference to the abyssal.
That will not occur at all, unless our reading of Kant has shifted
its basis-from the "subject" to Da-sein.
This is a step on a historical path leading to the nearness of that
thinking which understands the projection no longer as a condition
of representation but as Da-sein and as the thrownness of a clearing
which has found a stand whose first accomplishment is the bestowal
of concealment and thereby the manifestation of the refusal.
Nevertheless, for us today, it remains difficult in every respect to
experience the projection as event out of the essence of ap-propriation
as refusal. That would require nothing other than to keep every disarray
from beyng and to know that this latter, the most powerful, becomes
in the sphere of human concoctions the most fragile, especially
since the human being has long been accustomed to weigh the sovereignty
of beyng with the scales used for measuring the power of beings,
to weigh only with those scales, and never to venture that which
is most question-worthy.
Moreover, we have been moving from ancient times in a projection
of beyng, though the projection could never be experienced precisely
as such. (The truth of beyng was not a possible question.)
That this question does not arise is the constant impetus for the history
of the basic metaphysical positions, an impetus which as such does
not merely remain obscure to this history. It also remains absent, which
354 VIII. [449-450]
is why the metaphysics of absolute idealism can "construe" itself, in its
own developmental history, as the consummation of metaphysics.
That the subjectivity of the subjectum ultimately develops into the
absolute is merely an obscure sign that the projection essentially occurs
constantly ever since the beginning of the history of being, announcing
itself as that which has not been fabricated and cannot be
fabricated, and that this projection nonetheless is finally explained on
the basis of the unconditioned which also and precisely conditions
being. With this "explanation," philosophy strikes up against an end.
Nietzsche's rebellion is merely the inverse of this state.
Meanwhile, however, beings in the form of objects and objectively
present things have become ever more powerful. Beyng is restricted
to the last wisp of the most abstract and general concept and everything
"general" is suspected of having no power and no reality, of
being merely "human" and therefore also "far from essential." Because
beyng is posed in the guise of the most general and emptiest, it
no longer even needs to be explicitly repudiated in favor of beings.
We are so far advanced that we can "make do" without beyng. This
unique state of the history of mankind is, "fortunately" for humans,
scarcely recognized, let alone grasped, and certainly not taken up
into the will of history. For now it runs inconsiderately into its most
proximate consequences. One is then immediately able to make do
even without beings and is satisfied with objects; i.e., all "life" and all
reality can be found in bustling about with objects. At one stroke, procedures
and arrangements, mediating and dispelling, become more
essential than that to which all this applies. "Life" is engulfed by
lived experience, and the latter itself is raised into organized lived experience.
The organization of lived experiences is the highest lived
experience in which people find themselves together. Beings are
merely an occasion for this organizing, and what place is beyng then
supposed to occupy? Yet meditation now gains a view of the decisive
point of history, and knowledge becomes attentive to the fact that
only by traversing the most extreme decisions can a history still be
saved in face of the gigantic lack of history.
It is therefore futile to search through history, i.e., through its historiological
transmission, in order to encounter beyng itself as projection.
An intimation of this essence of beyng could strike us only if
we were already equipped to experience &:A~e£la as in the first beginning.
Yet how far removed are we from that and how definitively?
Even if thoroughly distorted and unrecognizable, the still unbroken
predominance of "metaphysics" has reached the point that beyng
represents itself to us only as a side effect of the representation of
beings as beings. It is from this Western basic determination (at first
§262 [450-451] 355
still genuine as oucrta) that all variations in the interpretation of beings
then arise.
That also is the reason we still seem to move within the domain of
representation, and this even within the necessity of experiencing (inventively
thinking) the truth of beyng. We grasp the "ontological," even
when grasped as a condition of the "ontic," indeed only as something
supplementary to the ontic, and we repeat the "ontological" (the projection
of beings onto beingness) once again as a self-application to itself:
the projection of beingness (as a projection of beyng) onto its truth.
There is at first no other way that could come out of the horizon of metaphysics
and make the question of being graspable at all as a task.
Through this procedure, beyng itself is apparently still made into
an object, and what is reached is the most decisive opposite of what
the first approach to the question of beyng had already opened up for
itself. Yet the point of Being and Time was indeed to expose "time" as
the domain of projection for beyng. Of course; but if the matter had
rested there, then the question of being would never have developed
as a question and thus as an inventive thinking of what is most
question -worthy.
Therefore the task was to overcome, at the decisive place, the crisis
of the question of being in the way that that question necessarily had
to be expounded at first, and especially to avoid an objectification of
beyng-to avoid it by, on the one hand, withholding the "temporal"
interpretation [die "temporale" Auslegung] of beyng and yet also by attempting
to make the truth of beyng "visible" independently of that
interpretation (freedom toward the ground in "On the Essence of
Ground"; especially the first part of that treatise still adheres strictly to
the ontic-ontological schema). The crisis could not be mastered merely
by thinking further in the already established direction of questioning.
Instead, a manifold leap into the essence of beyng itself had to be
ventured. That, in turn, required a more original insertion into history:
the relation to the beginning, the attempt to clarify aA~e€ta as an
essential character of beingness itself, the grounding of the difference
between being and beings. The thinking became ever more historical;
i.e., the distinction between a historiological and a systematic consideration
became ever more untenable and inappropriate.
Beyng itself announced its historical essence. But there arose and
still remains a fundamental difficulty: beyng is supposed to be projected
in its essence, and yet the projection itself is the "essence" of
beyng, pro-jection as ap-propriation.
Concerning the development of the question of being into the inventive
thinking of beyng, the more steadfast in beyng this thinking
becomes, the more relentlessly must it abandon every representational
356 VIII. Beyng [451-453]
approximation and come to know that the task is to prepare a historical
de-cision that can be endured only in a historical way, which
means that the attempt at inventive thinking must not overstep its
proper historical measure, lest it relapse into a previous stage.
The point of transition in the meditation must be equally clear
about the origination of the projection of beyng and about the other
moment, beyng as projection. Thereby the essence of projection
should likewise be determined no longer on the basis of what is representational
but from the character of beyng as appropriating event.
Yet the inventive thinking of beyng, as soon as and insofar as it is
able to leap, determines its own essence, as "thinking," on the basis
of that which being as appropriating event ap-propriates, Da-sein.
263. Every projection is a thrown projection
and therefore no findings regarding given things ever reach what is
true. Even less can the representational directedness toward given
things make visible the essence of what is true, i.e., truth itself; instead,
it always attains mere correctness.
What does that mean: thrown projection? When and how does a
projection succeed?
Projection [Entwurf]: the human being as casting oneself loose [sich
loswerfen] from beings and into beyng, without beings as such having
already been opened up. Here everything indeed remains obscure. Is
the human being then tied up? Indeed; tied to beings, and that is only
because the human being at the same time has a comportment (e.g.,
language) to "being" and because this relation to beyng is altogether
the ground of any relatedness within the relation of a comportment.
In casting loose from "beings," the human being first becomes the
human being. For only in that way does this being turn back to beings
and thus come to be as the one who has turned back. Yet the
question remains: how does this casting loose happen inceptually,
and how does this inception ground history?
The human being hitherto: the one who, in casting loose, has immediately
turned back, the one who in that way for the first time has traversed
the differentiation between beings and beyng though lacking the
capacity to experience this differentiation itself, let alone ground it.
But the turning back! The task is to know in the first place: the
way of tarrying and the kind of dowry, as well as the way, in the
turning back, what was already there is now encountered as what
ties down; what it is that beings are now found to be and what is now
§263 [453-454] 357
found to be a being; and which view of being is retained by the
human being in turning back to beings.
And then: how the casting loose and the turning back are forgotten,
how everything becomes an objectively present, orderable, and producible
possession, how ultimately the human being even comes to
self-understanding in the same terms (subjectum); how in that way everything
is then destroyed; how a monstrous confusion permeates all
human progress; and how, as machination, beyng places itself into its
distorted essence.
All this because the human being was not able to become master
of the turning back. This "not": the ground of the human being's
previous Western history, wherein the essence of history perhaps
still had to be concealed. This "not" is therefore no mere nullity.
The knowledge of being does not rest on an &:va~vYJO'l<; ["recollecting"],
as has been said since Plato, but on a forgetting, the forgetting of
the turning back. Yet this forgetting is only the consequence of the inability
to retain the turning back, and that inability arises from an incapacity
to abide in the abyss of the casting loose. That incapacity is not a
weakness; it is instead a consequence of the necessity to first preserve
being and beings in their initial, still ungraspable differentiation.
Therefore all that remains is the turning back: the retaining of
beingness (iOEa), which is a forgetting of what has eventuated.
For the casting loose is itself a thrown one and is at that time already,
though quite hiddenly, appropriating event (origin of history).
Yet how is this to be grasped more determinately, the casting oneself
loose? We must guard against resorting now to any human "properties"
or "faculties" such as reason. Apart from the fact that these themselves
are no longer illuminating, they for their part have indeed first
arisen on the unrecognized ground of the determination of the human
being as a perceiver and as one who has already turned back after the
casting loose.
If in this way every explanatory foothold is denied us, how then are
we to express this that is first, namely, that which determines the essence
of the human being? We must not take the human being as pregiven,
with previously familiar properties, and then seek in this being
for the casting loose; instead, the very casting oneself loose must in the
first place ground for us the essence of the human being. How so?
To cast oneself loose, to venture into the open: to belong neither to
something over and against nor to oneself, and yet to know both as encounter
in the open (although not in the manner of object and subject)
and to surmise that what casts itself loose here and that from which it
casts itself loose are of the same essence as the over-and-against.
358 VIII. Beyng [454-455]
En-counter [Ent-gegnung] is the ground of engagement [Begegnung]
which is not yet at all sought here.
En-counter is the ripping open of the "between" toward which the
oppositionality [Gegeneinander] happens as one that requires an open
realm.
What pertains to the "human being" here, and what is left behind?
In casting loose, the human being is grounded in that which
this being cannot fabricate but can only venture as a possibility,
namely, Da-sein.
To be sure, this only if one does not turn back, and never turns
back, to oneself as someone who appeared in the first casting loose
in the guise of an over-and-against, a cpua£lov, a ~0ov ["living being"].
What is to be ventured is the casting loose and the grounding of
the essence of the human being in the strangeness of the open realm.
Only now begin the history of being and the history of the human
being. As for beings? They no longer come to their truth in a turning
back, but as the preservation of what is strange. Strangers bring to
themselves what is strange with respect to the appropriating event
and allow the god to be found in what is strange.
The casting loose never succeeds from mere human initiative and
human devising.
This casting is one that is thrown in the oscillation of the appropriating
event, which means that being touches the human being and
displaces this being into the transformation, the first winning, and
the prolonged losing of the human essence.
This traversal of the straying of the essence, as the history of the human
being, is independent of all historiology.
And if the gods sink within what is not bestowed of the withholding
of beyng.
264. The projection of beyng and the understanding of being
According to the way it is introduced in Being and Time, the understanding
of being has a transitionally ambiguous character; in correspondence,
so does the designation of the human being ("human
Dasein," the Dasein in the human being).
On the one hand (glancing back, as it were, to metaphysics), the
understanding of being is grasped as the actually ungrounded ground
of the transcendental and in general of the representation of beingness
(all the way back to the i8£a).
On the other hand (because understanding is grasped as pro-jection,
and the latter as thrown), the understanding of being is an indication
§265 [455-456] 359
of the grounding of the essence of truth (manifesmess, the clearing
of the "there," Da-sein). To speak of the understanding of being that belongs
to Da-sein is redundant; it says the same thing twice and even
makes it weaker. For Da-sein "is" precisely the grounding of the truth
of beyng as event.
The understanding of being moves within the differentiation between
beingness and beings, without yet being able to bring to "validity" the
origin of the differentiation out of the decisional essence of beyng.
The understanding of being, however, is everywhere the opposite
of making beyng dependent on human opinion; indeed, it is in this
regard even more essentially other than a mere opposite. Where the
very matter at issue is the demolishing of the subject, how could being
be made "subjective"?
265. The inventive thinking of beyngI
The inventive thinking of beyng-this locution is supposed to name a
way, and in the transition perhaps the decisive way, in which the
future human being of the West takes over the essential occurrence
of the truth of beyng and thus becomes historical for the first time.
To become historical means to arise out of the essence of beyng and
therefore to remain belonging to the essential occurrence of the
truth of beyng; it does not mean to be delivered over to the past and
to historiological findings.
Now, however, historical reflection on the history of metaphysics
shows that thinking has been the guideline in the entire history of
the carrying out of the guiding question ("beingness and thinking").
This reflection leads to the insight that the predominance of thinking
(the fact that it itself became the guideline in the form of the representation
of something in general) more and more forced the interpretation
of the beingness of beings into that direction which had to
lead finally to the identification of being with the objectivity of beings,
i.e., with representedness in general. And this insight makes it
known that thinking and its predominance (in the treatment of the
guiding question and the choice of the guideline) in the end obstructed
every path to the question of the truth ofbeyng, i.e., to a possible
way of being compelled into that question. And now is inventive
thinking nevertheless supposed to become the avenue to the truth
of beyng, indeed not only thinking but inventive thinking, which is,
so to speak, the highest elevation of the predominance of thinking,
1. Cf. UberZegungen VII, p. 78ff.
360 VIII. Beyng [456-458]
wherein the greatest dependence of beyng on thinking would be expressed?
So it does seem and must seem, if we are coming from a
historical reflection on the guiding question and its guideline.
But it is mere seeming. In order to avoid this semblance, as if the
guideline of the guiding question were claimed all the more for the
basic question, which would indeed be preposterous in view of what
we have been saying, there must be made at the outset a distinction,
the neglect of which in fact constantly leads astray also the meditation
on the history of the guiding question and of its chosen guideline.
Thinking (1) is meant on the one hand as the name for the mode of
questioning-and thus in general for the mode of relatedness-within
the interrogative relation of the human being to the being of beings;
i.e., it means thinking in the sense of the basic stance of the "thinker"
(the philosopher) (thinking as asking the question of being).
Thinking (2) is meant on the other hand as the name for the
guideline employed by thinking (1) so as to possess the horizon
within which beings as such are interpreted with respect to beingness
(thinking as the guideline for the asking of the question of being).
Through a determinate interpretation of being (as iota), the vO£lv
of Parmenides now becomes the vO£lv of OWA£yw0m in Plato. The
A.6yoe, of Heraclitus becomes A.6yoe, as assertion and accordingly becomes
the guideline for the "categories" (Plato'S Sophist). The coupling
of both into ratio and thus the corresponding conception of voue,
and AOYOe, are prepared in Aristotle. In Descartes, ratio becomes
mathematical, which is possible only because this mathematical essence
has been installed ever since Plato and has been grounded as
one possibility within the aM0na of <pUO'le,. "Thinking" (2) in the
sense of assertion becomes the guideline of the thinking (1) of Western
thinkers. And then ultimately this thinking (2) provides the directive
for the interpretation of thinking (1) as the basic stance of
philosophy. (Connected with this is the peculiar predominance accorded
to the thinking of thinking and to what is thought in this
thinking as such, i.e., to the ego and to "self" -consciousness in modern
philosophy, a predominance which is raised to an extreme by the
identification of reality (being) as the absolute with thinking as the
unconditioned. In Nietzsche still, and precisely in him, there reigns
the unequivocal relation of being to propositional logic.)
If here, in the preparation for the other beginning, we hold on to
the essence of philosophy as the questioning of being (in a twofold sense:
questioning the being of beings and questioning the truth of beyng)and
we must hold on to this, precisely because the initial question of
being came indeed to its end and thus not to its beginning-then philosophizing
must also continue to be called thinking. But this decides
§265 [458-459] 361
nothing at all regarding whether, now as well, the guideline of thinking
(1) is thinking (2), and whether here something like a guideline
comes into play at ail, as it does in the treatment of the guiding question.
Now, in the transition to the other beginning, the question of
being indeed becomes the question of the truth of beyng in such a way
that this truth, as the essence of truth, belongs to the essential occurrence
of beyng itself. The choice of guideline becomes superfluous and
indeed is now impossible from the start. Being is no longer taken as
the beingness of beings, as a supplement represented from the point of
view of beings, a supplement that simultaneously appears as the apriori
of beings (Le., the apriori of what comes to presence). Rather, beyng
now essentially occurs in advance in its truth. This implies that even
thinking (1) is determined exclusively and in advance on the basis of
the essence of beyng and is not at all, as has been the case since Plato,
taken to be a purified representation of beings on the basis of beings.
The apprehension of being is not determined from the grasp of beingness
in the sense of the KOlVOV of the iota but, instead, out of the essential
occurrence of beyng itself. Beyng must originarily and inceptually
be reached in a leap so as to decide (out of itself, as it were) of which
essence thinking (1) and the thinker must "be." This manifold "must"
announces the quite peculiar necessity of a plight which itself can belong
only to the essence of beyng.
We have been bound to the tradition for so long and so tightly, however,
that we cannot avoid at least co-intending in the term "thinking"
always and immediately the representing of something in general and
thus the representing of a unity of subordinate differentiations of
kinds. Moreover, when thinking is grasped as the thinking of being,
that then counts as the most general of all. Every question of being
stands in the light of this question regarding what is most general, and
the most general can be secured only through a grasp of its particularizations
and their interrelations. To grasp this that is most general then
indeed means merely to leave it in its indeterminateness and emptiness,
to posit indeterminacy as its unique determination, which means
to represent it itself immediately.
In this way, through the ordinary ("logical") concept of thinking,
the essence of beyng is again already decided in advance, whereby
the essence itself is likewise understood in advance as having the
character of an object of a representation.
Yet we must free ourselves even from that, so as to leave entirely
to beyng itself the disposing-determining power in the essential
characterization of thinking (inventive thinking). The Greek interpretation
of Bv n ov as £v, the obscure priority always possessed up to
now by oneness and unity in the thinking of being, can surely not be
362 VIII. Beyng [459-460]
derived from logic and from the fact that MyoC; as assertion plays the
role of guideline, for indeed this understanding of MyoC; presupposes
a determinate interpretation of QV (UTWKetJl€VOV). Upon closer inspection,
that unity is merely the foremost way presencing as such appears
to gathering representation (J\EY€lV); it is in this presencing that
beings have indeed already gathered themselves in what they are and
in the fact that they are. Presence can be grasped as gathering and
thus as unity and even must be so grasped, since MyoC; has priority.
Yet unity, in itself and by itself, is not an originary determination of
the essence of the being of beings. Unity necessarily strikes the inceptual
thinkers, because the truth of being has to remain concealed
to them and to their beginning and because, in order to grasp being
at all, presencing must be latched onto as the first and most proximate
way in which being shows itself. Thus the lv, but always at the
same time related to the many-as things that come and go, arise
(become) and perish (presencing and absencing in presence itself:
Anaximander, Heraclitus, Parmenides). For the other beginning,
this unshaken and never questioned determination of being (unity)
still can, and indeed must, become question-worthy, and then unity
points back to "time" (the abyssal time of time-space). Then we also
see, however, that with this priority of presence (the present),
wherein unity is grounded, something has been decided, namely,
that this which is most self-evident harbors the most alienating decision. Furthermore,
we see that this decisional character belongs indeed to the
essential occurrence of beyng and hints at the uniqueness in every
instance, and the most originary historicality, of beyng itself.
We can already infer from this, even with just a vague knowledge
of the history of beyng, that beyng is indeed never sayable definitively
and therefore never even sayable in a merely "provisional" way, although
the previous interpretation (which makes beyng the most general
and emptiest) would feign otherwise.
That the essence of beyng can never be said definitively is not a
shortcoming. On the contrary, the non-definitive knowledge adheres
precisely to the abyss and thus to the essence of beyng. This adherence
to the abyss belongs to the essence of Da-sein as the grounding
of the truth of beyng.
To adhere to the abyss is at once to leap into the essential occurrence
of beyng in such a way that beyng itself unfolds its essential
power as the appropriating event, as the "between" for the indigence
of god and for the stewardship of the human being.
The inventive thinking of beyng, the naming of the essence of beyng,
is nothing other than the venture of helping the gods out into beyng and
making available to the human being the truth of what is true.
§265 [460-462] 363
This "definition" of thinking, by way of that which it "thinks," carries
out a complete renunciation of every "logical" interpretation of
thinking. For it is one of the greatest prejudices of Western philosophy
to believe that thinking must be determined "logically," i.e., on
the basis of the assertion. (The "psychological" explanation of thinking
is merely an appendix to the "logical" interpretation and presupposes
the latter, even where it believes it can completely supplant the
logical; "psychological" stands here for "biological-anthropological.")
It is merely the other side of this prejudice that shows itself when the
rejection of the "logical" interpretation of thinking (i.e., of the relation
to being; d. "What is Metaphysics?") causes the angst or, rather, the
fear that the rigor and seriousness of thinking will now be endangered
and everything be left to feeling and its "judgment." For who
says and who has ever proved that thinking as meant in logic is the
only "rigorous" thinking? That holds, if at all, only under the presupposition
that the logical interpretation of being is the only possible
one, which is even more of a prejudice. In regard to the essence of
beyng, perhaps "logic" is precisely the least strict and least serious way
of essential determination and amounts merely to an illusion, one
indeed of an even deeper essence than the "dialectical illusion" exposed
by Kant in the domain of the possible objectification of beings
as a whole. In relation to the grounding of the essence of the truth of
beyng, "logic" itself is an illusion, but the most necessary illusion the
history of beyng has known up to now. "Logic" itself, which attains
its highest form in Hegel's metaphysics, can be grasped in its essence
only out of the other beginning of the thinking of beyng. Yet the abyssal
character of this thinking allows even the so-called rigor of logical
acumen (as a form for finding truth, not only for expressing what
is already found) to appear as a mere pastime that is not master of
itself and that could indeed even deteriorate into philosophical erudition
in which all those who are furnished with any acumen at all
merely mill about without ever being struck by beyng and without
ever surmising the meaning of the question of beyng.
The inventive thinking of beyng is now also correspondingly rare,
however, and perhaps we are favored with it only in the rough steps
of a preparation, if the venture of this abyssal leap deserves to be
called a favor.
Only this thinking of beyng is truly un-conditioned, i.e., not conditioned
and determined by something conditioned which lies outside
of it and outside of what is to be thought by it, but instead determined
uniquely by what in it is to be thought, by beyng itself, which,
however, is not "the absolute." Nevertheless, when thinking (in the
sense of inventive thinking) receives its essence from beyng, and
364 VIII. [462-463]
when even Da-sein (whose one steadfastness must lie in inventive
thinking) is ap-propriated first and only by being, then the thinking,
i.e., philosophy, attains its most proper and highest origin from itself,
from what in it is to be thought. Only now is such thinking utterly
invulnerable to appreciations and valuations which measure according
to goals and uses, i.e., which mistreat philosophy (just like art) as
a cultural accomplishment or in the end as a mere cultural expression
and which place upon it demands that seem to exceed philosophy
but in truth remain profoundly beneath it. These demands drag
the essence of philosophy down into comprehensibility and thereby
displace philosophy into the domain of things merely tolerated and
made light of.
Seen from such low ground, how arrogant must it be to claim an
unconditioned origin for philosophy. Yet even seen from a higher level
of assessment, indeed from any level ever sought, we attain no view of
the essence of philosophy which would not by necessity also concomitantly
have in view the "titanic." In metaphysics, and throughout its
history, the titanic remains veiled and is ultimately diminished to a
mere epistemologically suspect overstepping of limits. Nonetheless, if
thinking in the transition from metaphysics must decide in favor of
the inventive thinking of beyng, then the danger of the unavoidable
presumptuousness is raised to what is essential. To be sure, the knowledge
of this danger also changes, in the sense that the essential endangerment
goes into hiding as soon as it is named. This reference pertains
to the ambiguity of the transition, wherein meditation must ever
and again touch on that which, in the carrying out of the transition,
at once and increasingly transposes itself into simple action. This ambiguity
maintains an especially tenacious grip in philosophy because
philosophy, as thoughtful questioning and precisely insofar as it is of
an unconditioned origin, and indeed the more originally it is so, must
by necessity take itself into its own knowledge.
In the transition from metaphysics, which takes beyng as the most
general and most ordinary, the uniqueness of beyng will come to
occur essentially in a correspondingly unique strangeness and obscurity.
In transitional thinking, everything that pertains to the history
of being possesses the unusualness of the current and the nonrepeatable.
Where and when it does succeed, the inventive thinking
of beyng thus attains a hardness and sharpness of historicality;
speech still lacks the language for this historicality, i.e., lacks the
naming and the ability to hear which would be adequate to beyng.
The inventive thinking of beyng does indeed not simply think up
a concept; instead, it gains that liberation from mere beings which
makes appropriate the determination of thinking on the basis of beyng.
§265 [463-464] 365
Inventive thinking displaces us out into that history whose "events"
are nothing other than the strokes of the event of appropriation itself.
We can say so much only by saying that this eventuates. What is
this "this"? The fact that H6lderlin poetizes the future poet, that
H6lderlin himself "is" as the first to bring up for decision the nearness
and remoteness of the former and future gods (d. the standpoint
of the history of beyng).
Who could be surprised if, in the transition from metaphysics to the
inventive thinking of beyng, this reference to the first "that" of the
history of beyng is taken as completely arbitrary and unintelligible? It
would hardly be of any use to retort by clarifying how all considerations
stemming from the "historiology of literature," from the history
of poetry, and from the "history of the spirit" must remain extraneous.
Required here is already the leap into beyng and into its truth, the
experience that, under the name of H6lderlin, this unique bringingup-
far-decision eventuates-is eventuating and not merely has eventuated.
We could attempt to delineate this "event" historically in its
uniqueness by seeing it in the midst of what is still the highest level
and richest development of what has just past: in the midst of the
metaphysics of German Idealism, in the midst of the formation of
Goethe's image of the world, and in the midst of that which is separated
from H6lderlin by abysses (Le., in the midst of "romanticism"),
even if all this has, from a historiological point of view, "influenced"
him-the bearer of the name H6lderlin, but not the steward of beyng.
But how does this contrast help us? It will, at most, merely provoke a
new misunderstanding, as if H6lderlin were an "idiosyncrasy" precisely
within that history of metaphysics and art. At issue here, however,
is indeed not the "within," nor simply the exceptional "without,"
but the thrust of beyng itself. This thrust cannot be deduced and is to
be captured in its purest "that," namely, in the fact that now, and since
then, this decision stands in the history of the West, no matter whether
it is perceived by the still-current era or whether it even can be perceived
at all or not.
This decision first lays time-space around beyng itself and, as this
time-space, extends out of beyng in unity with time, which temp oralizes
time-space in the originary unity of this temporal-spatial playing
field.
Henceforth, all thinking which intends beingness by basing itself on
beings, and departing from them, remains outside of the history in
which beyng as event appropriates thinking in the form of what has the
character of Dasein and of what belongs to Dasein. The vocation of
thinking is to salvage for beyng the uniqueness of its history and to
prevent the essence of thinking from ever evaporating again into the
366 VIII. Beyng [464-466]
fashioning of pigeonholes for the faded "generality" of the categories.
Accordingly, however, those who know know that the preparation of
this history of beyng (preparation in the sense of the grounding of the
readiness for the preservation of the truth of beyng in beings, which
thereby first come to be) will take a very long time and will remain unrecognized
far into the future. The preparers must still be able to stand
quite apart from the ones who ground, provided these preparers want to
be touched even obliquely by the thrust of the refusal of beyng and
thereby become surmisers. The saying of the inventive thinking of
beyng remains something bold and so is called a way of procuring both
the lodging of the gods and the alienation of humans (d. beyng as event).
266. Beyng and the "ontological difference"
The "differentiation"
This differentiation bears the guiding question of metaphysics: What
are beings? But this differentiation is not expressly raised to the level of
knowledge in the course of asking the guiding question and is even less
held fast as question-worthy. Does the differentiation bear the guiding
question, or does the guiding question first carry out, although not
explicitly, the differentiation? Obviously the latter. For the differentiation
appears in the horizon of the guiding question, and also in a first
clarifying meditation on the guiding question, as something ultimate.
Yet the differentiation should indeed only be something prefatory
(Why?), wherein an establishing of the basic question (the question of
the truth of beyng) can be clarified in a conducive way.
The question of beyng, as the basic question, would have grasped
nothing of its own most question-worthy character if it had not been
driven immediately to the question of the origin of the "ontological difference."
The differentiation between "being" and "beings," the fact
that beyng sets itself off in relief over and against beings, can originate
only in the essential occurrence of beyng, if on the other hand beings as
such are also grounded by beyng. The essence and the ground of this
setting in relief consist in the obscurity harbored in all metaphysics in
a way that is the more strange the more decisively metaphysics is entrenched
in the view of thinking (especially in the sense of absolute
thinking) as the measure of beingness. Beyng as appropriating event is
the essence and the ground of this setting in relief. Beyng, as the "between"
which clears, moves itself into this clearing and therefore,
though never recognized or surmised as appropriation, is for representational
thinking something generally differentiable, and differentiated,
as being. This applies already to the way beyng essentially occurs
§266 [466-467] 367
in the first beginning, namely, as q:rUOt<;, which comes forth as aA~eEla
but which is at once forgotten in favor of beings (ones that are perceivable
as such only in virtue of aMena) and is reinterpreted as a being
that is most eminently, i.e., as a mode of being and specifically the
highest mode. Here also lies the reason the ontological difference as
such does not become known: basically because the only needed distinction
is between one being and another (the being that is most eminently).
The consequence is visible in the widespread confusion in the use
of the terms "beyng" and "beings," which have become interchangeable
ad libitum, so that even in intending beyng a mere being is represented
and is depicted as what is most general in all representation.
Thus being (as ens qua ens-ens in commune) is only the thinnest rarefaction
of beings and is itself still a being, though indeed the one that
is most eminently-since every being is determined in relation to it.
Even if now, after the decisive naming of this differentiation in Being
and Time, a more careful use of language is zealously pursued, that still
does not amount to anything and is in no way testimony that a knowledge
and a questioning of beyng have come to life. On the contrary,
the danger is now heightened that being itself will be taken and elaborated
as something objectively present for itself.
To make this "differentiation" explicit is not at all to say something
thoughtful, unless the explicitation totally springs from the
question of the "meaning of beyng," i.e., from the question of the
truth of beyng. Furthermore, this question must not be grasped as an
arbitrary one; instead, it must be asked as the question which is historically
decisive for metaphysics and which decides about metaphysics
and about its questioning. In other words, beyng itself must become
a plight, one which first disposes for itself the destiny of the
"thinking" that belongs to it.
The "ontological difference" is a passageway which becomes unavoidable
if the necessity of asking the basic question is to be made
visible on the basis of the guiding question. And the guiding question
itself? This task cannot be eluded, however, as long as some way
or other must still be secured which leads out of the ever so scanty
tradition of a metaphysical thinking that actually questions and into
the necessarily unasked question of the truth of beyng.
Yet this characterization of the "ontological difference" as such
and the postulation of it with the aim of overcoming metaphysics
seem at first to produce the opposite effect, namely, an even firmer
entrenchment in "ontology." The differentiation is taken as a doctrinal
terminus and as the key point of an ontological consideration,
and what is decisive is forgotten: the fact that this differentiation is
supposed to be a passageway.
368 VIII. Beyng [467-4681
Thereby is already obviated every endeavor to carry out this differentiation
in a non-representational way, i.e., such that the differentiated
are not posited uniformly on the same plane of differentiatedness,
even if this plane is left quite indeterminate. In fact, however,
this differentiation, taken formally and said straightforwardly, can
only be an indication that the relation to being is other than the relation
to beings and that this dissimilarity in the relations pertains to
the distinct ways of relating oneself to the differentiated. As grounded,
the relation to being is steadfastness in Da-sein; it means to stand
within the truth of beyng (as event).
The relation to beings is the creative conservation of the preservation
of beyng in the beings which, in accord with such preservation,
place themselves as beings into the clearing of the "there."
In the transition to Da -sein within the questioning of the truth of
beyng, the only possibility at first is to modify the representation so
much that the relation to being is established as a projection and thus
as the character of understanding (Da-sein's understanding of being).
These determinations, as decisive as they remain for a first clarification
of the wholly other asking of the question of being, are nevertheless,
seen with respect to the question-worthiness of beyng and of its
essential occurrence, merely something like a first tentative step on a
very long springboard. With this step hardly anything is detected of
the demand which, at the end of the springboard, is necessary for
making the leap. Indeed this step is not even understood as the first
one of a long "passage" but as already the last step. That allows one to
settle into what is said as a determinate "doctrine" or "view" and with
it to produce all sorts of historiological accomplishments. Or else one
rejects this "doctrine" and deludes oneself that something has thereby
been decided regarding the question of being.
Basically, however, the making explicit of the "ontological difference"
merely testifies that the attempt at a more original question of
being must at the same time be a more essential appropriation of the
history of metaphysics. Yet to unify both of these or to possess them already
as radically one (i.e., to begin in what is wholly other and to remain
faithful to the history of the first beginning, while essentially surpassing
all previous historiological accomplishments, to master and yet to
maintain, with equal decisiveness, what is mutually exclusive) is so foreign
to the usual procedure of historiology and system-building that
these latter can never be struck by the idea that such unity could be required.
(But what else is the aim of "phenomenological destruction"?)
Therefore, even the "ontological difference" is then suspended in
the indeterminate. To all appearances, it had already been known at
least since Plato, but in truth it was merely put into effect and, so to
speak, utilized. Kant knows it in the concept of the "transcendental,"
§267 [468-470] 369
and yet he does not know it, because, in the first place, he grasps beingness
as objectivity and because this interpretation of beingness
then completely cuts off every question of being. The "ontological difference"
once again seems to be something "new," which it cannot
be and does not want to be. It is the name only of that which bears
the entire history of philosophy and as such could never be for philosophy
(in the form of metaphysics) something that had to be questioned
and thus named. It is something transitional in the transition
from the end of metaphysics to the other beginning.
The inceptual history of beyng itself, however, is the reason this
differentiation can be named the structure of the realm of Western
metaphysics and indeed must be named in this indeterminate form.
<I>6crl~ implies that, for the most general representation (thinking),
being is what is most present in the greatest constancy and as such is,
so to speak, the emptiness of the presentness itself. Insofar as thinking
has fallen under the dominance of "logic," this presentness of
everything which comes to presence (everything objectively present) is
understood as the highest universality and-despite the stricture of
Aristotle that being is not a y€vo~-as the "most general." If we keep
in mind this historical provenance of the ontological difference out of
the very history of being, then the knowledge of this provenance
already compels us into the anticipatory distance of the belongingness
to the truth of being and into the experience that, inasmuch as
we are borne by the "ontological difference" in all our specifically
human relatedness to beings, we remain exposed to the power of
beyng more essentially in this way than in any ever so "close to life"
relation to something "real."
This, the pervasive disposedness of the human being by beyng itself,
must furthermore be made experienceable through the naming of the
"ontological difference" -i.e., if the very question of being is to be awakened
as a question. On the other hand, with respect to the overcoming
of metaphysics (i.e., with respect to the historical interplay between the
first and the other beginning), the "ontological difference" must be clarified
in its belonging to Da-sein and, seen in that regard, will assume the
form of a, indeed the, "basic structure" of Da-sein itself.
267. Beyng2
(Event)
Beyng is the appropriating event. This term names beyng in a thoughtful
way and grounds the essential occurrence of beyng in the structure
2. Cf. the saying "of" beyng, p. 372f.
370 VIII. Beyng [470-471]
proper to that essential occurrence, a structure which is indicated by
the manifoldness of the events.
The event is:
1. ap-propriation, Le., the fact that in the indigence out of which
the gods need beyng, beyng compels Da-sein to the grounding of the
truth of beyng and thus lets the "between," the ap-propriation of
Dasein by the gods and the assignment of the gods to themselves, essentially
occur as appropriating event.
2. The event of ap-propriation includes the de-cision [Ent-scheidung]:
the fact that freedom, as the abyssal ground, lets arise a need
out of which, as the excess of the ground, the gods and humans come
forth in their separateness.
3. The ap-propriation, as de-cision, brings the separated ones into
the en-counter [Ent-gegnung]: the fact that this "toward one another"
in the broadest indigent decision must stand in the most extreme
"against," because it bridges over the abyssal ground of the needed
beyng.
4. The en-counter is the origin of the strife, and the strife essentially
occurs by unsettling beings from their lostness in mere beingness. The
un-settling [Ent-setzung] characterizes the appropriating event in its relation
to beings as such. The ap-propriation of Da-sein allows Da-sein
to become steadfast in what is unusual in relation to just any being.
5. But the un-settling, grasped out of the clearing of the "there," is
simultaneously the with-drawal [Ent-zug] of the event: the fact that
the event withdraws from all representational calculation and essentially
occurs as refusaL
6. Beyng essentially occurs in a very richly structured way and without
image, yet it rests in itself and in its simplicity. Indeed the character of
the "between" (relative to the gods and humans) might very well lead to
the mistaken view that beyng is mere relation, the result and consequence
of the relationship of the relata. But the appropriating event is
indeed this relating (if such a designation is still possible) which first
brings the relata to themselves, in order to place their respective indigence
and stewardship in the open realm of the en-countering-decided
ones. But the gods and humans do not first assume their respective indigence
and stewardship as a property; it is rather the case that they
draw their essence from these. Beyng is the need of the gods and, as
needing Da -sein, is more abyssal than anything which may be called a
being and which can no longer be named by beyng. Beyng is needed, is
the indigence of the gods, yet cannot be derived from them. It is precisely
the reverse: beyng, in its abyssal essential occurrence as ground,
is superior to the gods. Beyng appropriates Da-sein and nevertheless is
not the origin of Da-sein. Without mediation, the "between" essentially
§267 [471-472] 371
occurs as the ground of the ones en-countering each other in this
ground. That determines the simplicity of the "between," a simplicity
which is not emptiness, but is instead the ground of the fullness arising
out of the en-counter as strife.
7. The simplicity of beyng is marked by uniqueness. This simplicity
does not at all need to be set in relief and does not need differences, not
even the difference from beings. For this difference is required only if
being itself is branded a kind of being and thus is not at all preserved
as the unique but is instead generalized into the most general.
8. The uniqueness of beyng grounds its solitude, in accord with
which beyng casts round about itself only nothingness, whose neighborhood
remains the most genuine one and the most faithful guardian
of the solitude. As a consequence of its solitude, beyng essentially
occurs in relation to "beings" always only mediately, through the
strife of world and earth.
In none of these appellations is the essence of beyng fully thought,
yet in each of them it is "wholly" thought; "wholly" means here: in
each case the thinking "of" beyng is wrenched by beyng itself into its
unusualness and is deprived of any recourse to the explanations that
could be provided by beings.
Event always means event as ap-propriation, de-cision, en-counter,
un-settling, withdrawal, simplicity, uniqueness, solitude. The unity of
this essential occurrence is non-objective and can be known only in
that thinking which must venture the unusual-not as the peculiarity
of something odd, but as the necessity of that which is most inconspicuous
and in which are opened up the abyssal ground of the
ground-Iessness of the gods and the grounding condition of humans
and in which, furthermore, something is assigned to beyng that metaphysics
could never know, namely, Da-sein.
By recalling the old differentiations (being and becoming) which
were usual until Nietzsche brought them to their end, the determination
of beyng as event might be thought to correspond with the
interpretation of being as "becoming" ("life," "motion"). Even apart
from the unavoidable relapse into metaphysics and the dependence
of the representations of "motion," "life," and "becoming" on an understanding
of being as beingness, such an interpretation of the
event would completely lead away from it. The reason is that this
interpretation speaks of the event as an object instead of letting its
essential occurrence (and only this) speak for itself such that thinking
would remain a thinking of beyng which does not talk about
beyng but, instead, says beyng in a saying that belongs to what is
opened up in the saying. Such a saying would also avoid all objectification
and falsification of the event as something congealed (or, on
372 VIII. Beyng [472-473]
the other hand, as something "fluid"). Otherwise, the plane of representation
would be broached and the unusualness of beyng denied.
The full essential occurrence of beyng in the truth of the event
allows the recognition that beyng and only beyng is and that beings
are not. With this knowledge of beyng, thinking first attains the trace
of the other beginning in the transition from metaphysics. The position
of metaphysics is that beings are, non-beings also "are," and
beyng is the being that is most eminently.
The other position is that beyng uniquely is and therefore "is"
never a being and certainly not the being that most eminently is. But
beings are not, and precisely for that reason the thinking of beingness,
having forgotten beyng, attributes beingness to beings as their
most general property. In the usual way of representing, this attribution
has its rights, and therefore in opposition to it we must declare:
beyng essentially occurs, and beings "are."
Beyng is. Does not Parmenides say the same thing: £anv yap dvw?
No; for precisely here already £lv(n stands for fOV ["beings"]. In other
words, being is here already the being that is most eminently, the
ovrw<; ov, which immediately becomes the KOlvov, i8Ea, the KaeOAOU
["universal"] .
Beyng is-that means beyng alone essentially occurs its own essence
(event) [das Seyn west allein das Wesen seiner selbst (Ereignis)].
Beyng essentially occurs-it must of course be said in this manner if spoken
with regard to metaphysics, which maintains that beings "are"
(the ambiguity of transitional thinking).
Beings are; this is said on the basis of the mostly implicit basic position
of metaphysics, according to which the human being encounters
beings as what is closest, proceeds from them, and goes back to them.
Thus the assertorial character of this proposition is different than in
the case of saying that beyng is. "Beings are" must be carried out as a
pro-position [A us-sage] which has its correctness; it is directed toward
beings and reports on their beingness. Here pro-position (Myo<;) does
not merely mean the subsequent linguistic expression of a previous
representation; instead, pro-position (ano-cpaval<;) is here the basic
form of the relation to beings as such and thus to beingness.
The saying "beyng is" possesses a very different character as something
said (d. Oberlegungen IV, p. If.). Admittedly, this saying could
always be taken as a proposition and a propositional assertion. Then,
thought metaphysically, it must be concluded: beyng in this way becomes
a being and, it follows, the being that is most eminently. The
saying does not express about beyng something that supervenes to it
in generaL something objectively present in it; on the contrary, it
says beyng itself out of itself. It says that beyng alone is master of its
§267 [473-475] 373
essence, and, precisely for that reason, the "is" can never become
something merely supervenient to it. The saying says beyng out of
the "is" and, as it were, back into the "is." At the same time, however,
this characterizes the basic form to which every saying "about" beyng
(better: every saying of beyng) must adhere. For this saying "of"
beyng does not have beyng as an object; instead, it arises from beyng
as from its origin and therefore, when it is supposed to name the origin,
always speaks back into this origin. Accordingly, here all "logic"
falls too short in its "thinking," since Myoc:, as assertion can no longer
remain the guideline for the representation of being. At the same
time, however, the saying is drawn into the ambiguity of the assertion,
and the thinking "of" being becomes essentially more difficult.
Yet this is merely evidence of the first proximity to the remoteness of
beyng: the fact that beyng "is" the very refusing and unsettling and,
as such, must be preserved in the event. Beyng will therefore always
be difficult and will be a struggle manifest in the extreme depths as
the play of that which pertains to the abyss.
If beings are not, then that means beings continue to belong to beyng
as the preservation of its truth and yet can never transfer themselves
into the essential occurrence of beyng. Beings as such, however, do
distinguish themselves with regard to their respective belongingness
to the truth of beyng and with regard to their exclusion from the essential
occurrence of beyng.
What now becomes of the differentiation between beings and beyng?
We are currently grasping it as the merely metaphysically conceived,
and thus already misinterpreted, foreground of a de-cision which is
beyng itself (d. no. 2 above). This differentiation can no longer be read
off from beings in a progression to the generalization that sets their
being out in relief. Nor can the differentiation be justified by referring
to the fact that "we" (Who?) must understand being in order to experience
any being precisely as a being. That fact is indeed correct, and
reference to it can at any time serve as a first indication of being and of
the capacity of beings and beyng to be differentiated. And yet: what
results here, what is already presupposed here, namely, the metaphysical
thinking of beingness, cannot constitute the basic trait in which
the essence of beyng and the essence of its truth were able to be
grasped, in their essential occurrence, in terms of the historicality of
being and in the mode of Dasein (d. Beyng, 271. Da-sein). Nevertheless,
the transition to the other beginning cannot be prepared unless
the courage for the old (of the first beginning) comes to the fore in the
transition and thus the attempt is first made to propel the old, in its
own setting, beyond itself: beings, being, the "meaning" (truth) of
being (d. Being and Time). Yet from the very outset it must be seen that
374 VIII.
this more original repetition demands, and has already reached in a
leap, a complete transformation of the human being into Da-sein,
since the truth of beyng (this truth is supposed to open itself up) will
bring about nothing other than the more original essential occurrence
of beyng itself This means that everything is transformed and that the
bridges which just now led to beyng must be pulled down, because
another time-space is opened up by beyng itself, a time-space that necessitates
a new grounding and building of beings. Nowhere in beings,
only in beyng, does the mildness of the frightful within the intimacy
of all essences turn like a storm toward humans and toward the gods,
and it does so differently each time.
The possible essentially occurs in beyng alone and as its deepest fissure,
so that in the thinking of the other beginning beyng must first
be thought in the form of the possible. (On the other hand, metaphysics
makes the "actual," i.e., beings, the point of departure and the goal
of the determination of being.)
What is possible, and indeed the possible as such, opens itself only
to an attempt. The attempt must be ruled by a willing that grasps
ahead. Willing, as placing oneself beyond oneself, stands within a being-
beyond-oneself. This standing is the original spatializing of the
temporal-spatial playing field into which beyng protrudes: Da-sein.
Beyng essentially occurs as venture. And only in the venture does the
human being attain the realm of de-cision. And only in the venture
[Wagnis] is the human being capable of pondering [Wagen].
Being is, and therefore it does not become a being-this can be
expressed most pointedly by saying that beyng is possibility, something
that is never objectively present and yet is always bestowing
and denying itself in refusal through ap-propriation.
Only if thinking has ventured to think beyng itself, without falsifying
it into a mere faint echo of beings, can the human being realize that
beings never allow beyng to be surmised even to the least degree.
Accordingly, if beyng is thought as the "between" into which the
gods are compelled, such that beyng is a plight for humans, then the
gods and humans cannot be taken as "given," "objectively present."
In the projection of that thinking, they are taken over in their respectively
different ways as the historical, which itself first comes to
its essential occurrence out of the event of the "between," i.e., comes
to the battle over its own essence, comes to the enduring of the decision
regarding one of the hidden possibilities.
"Human being" and "god" are mere husks of words without history,
unless the truth of beyng brings itself to speak in these words.
Beyng essentially occurs as the "between" for god and the human
being, but in such a manner that this interspace first grants to god
§268 [476-477] 375
and the human being a place for the possibility of their essential occurrence.
This "between" overflows its own banks and from this
overflowing first allows the banks to rise up as banks, ones that always
belong to the stream of the appropriating event, ones whose
rich possibilities are always concealed, ones that constitute the hither
and thither of the inexhaustible relations in whose clearing worlds
conjoin themselves and sink away and earths disclose themselves
and suffer destruction.
Yet even in such a way, and above all in such a way, being must
remain inexplicable, the venture against nothingness which first owes
its origin to beyng.
The greatest danger to beyng, greatest because it constantly arises
out of beyng itself, a danger that belongs to beyng as its time-space, is
for beyng to make itself "a being" and to tolerate confirmation on the
basis of beings. The history of metaphysics and metaphysics itself, in
the sense of the priority of beings over being, testify to this danger and
to the difficulty of bearing up against it. The ambiguity in the differentiation
between beings and being attributes being to beings and yet
dissimulates a separation that is not grounded in beyng itself.
Metaphysics, however, makes being something extant, i.e., makes
being a being, because it posits being, qua "Idea," as the goal of beings
and then, so to speak, appends "culture" onto this goal-positing.
But beyng is the refusal of all "goals" and the denial of every possibility
of explanation.
268. Beyng
(The differentiation)
Beyng essentially occurs as the appropriation of the gods and humans
to their en-counter. In the clearing of the concealment of the
"between," a "between" which arises out of, and with, the en-countering
appropriation, there arises the strife of world and earth. It is
only within the temporal-spatial playing field of this strife that the
appropriation comes to be preserved and lost and that so-called beings
step into the open realm of this clearing.
There is no immediate difference between beyng and beings, because
there is altogether no immediate relation between them. Even
though beings as such oscillate only in the appropriation, beyng remains
abyssally far from all beings. The attempts to represent both
together, already in the very manner of naming them, stem from
metaphysics. Indeed, what is precisely characteristic of metaphysics
is that it takes this differentiation as an immediate one, even when it
376 VIII. Beyng [477-479]
is worked out with very little clarity and explicitness. Being is understood
as the generalization of beings, just as graspable in representation
as are beings, only more "abstractly." Being is still a being,
though in rarefaction, so to speak, and yet is not a being, since actuality
is reserved for beings alone. On the other hand, due to the predominance
of thinking (the representing of something as the K01VOV
and the Ka8oAou), being qua beingness nevertheless has assumed a
priority, one which then appears in the corresponding determination
of the relation between being and beings.
Being is the condition for beings, which are thereby already established
in advance as things [Dinge] (the objectively present at hand).
Being conditions [be-dingt] beings either as their cause (summum ensorn.
noupyo<; ["craftsman"]) or as the ground of the objectivity of the
thing in representation (condition of the possibility of experience or in
some way as the "earlier," which it is in virtue of its higher constancy
and presence, as accords with its generality). Here, thought in PlatonicAristotelian
terms, conditioning as a character of being still corresponds
most nearly to the essence of being (presence and constancy) in the
first beginning but also cannot be explained further. Thus it is always
off the mark, and destructive of the originality and caution of Greek
thought, to read this conditioning, whether in a causal or even "transcendental"
sense, back into the relation between being and beings as
understood by the Greeks. Admittedly, however, even the later modes
of the conditioning of beings into beings through being are predelineated
and called for by the Greek interpretation, inasmuch as beingness
(iOea) is the properly produced (rcOlO1JllEVOV) and therefore is what
makes up beings and makes beings and also inasmuch as, on the other
hand and at the same time, the ioea is the VOOUllEVOV ["thing thought
of"], the represented as such, that which is seen in advance in all representation.
Metaphysics never transcends these ways of differentiating
being and beings and of grasping their relation. Indeed, it is of the
essence of metaphysics to create expedients for itself by mixing up
these modes of thought and to vacillate between extreme positions,
that of the unconditionality of beingness and that of the unconditionality
of beings as such. On this basis, the ambiguous labels "idealism"
and "realism" receive unambiguous metaphysical significance. A consequence
of this metaphysical conception of being and beings is the
distribution of both into domains (regions) and levels; this at the same
time contains the presupposition for the development of the notion of
system in metaphysics.
What remains incomparable, and can never be grasped in metaphysical
concepts and modes of thought, is the projection of beyng as
appropriation, a projection that experiences itself as thrown and that
§268 [479-480] 377
repudiates every appearance of having been fabricated. Here beyng
reveals itself in that essential occurrence whose abyssal character is
the reason the en-countering ones (gods and humans) and the conflictual
ones (world and earth) attain their essence in their originary
history between beyng and beings and admit the commonality in the
naming of beyng and beings only as something most question-worthy
and most separated.
When the gods and humans come into en -counter through the plight
of beyng, humans are cast out of their previous, modern, Western position.
They are posited back behind themselves in completely other domains
of determination, wherein neither animality nor rationality can
occupy an essential place, even if the subsequent establishment of these
properties in actual human beings might have its justification. (Thereby
it always remains to ask who these are that find such procedures justified
and even build "sciences" like biology and the study of race upon
them and use them, presumably, to lay the ground of a "worldview."
Indeed, this is the ambition of every "worldview.")
The projection of beyng as event first allows us to surmise the
ground of history and thus also its essence and essential place. History
is not a prerogative of humans; instead, it is the essence of beyng
itself. History plays out only in the "between" of the en-counter of
gods and humans, with this "between" as the ground of the strife of
world and earth; history is nothing other than the eventuation of
this "between." Therefore historiology never attains the level of history.
The differentiation separating beyng and beings is a de-cision
deriving from the essence of beyng itself and reaching from far, and
only in that way is it to be thought.
If beyng is understood as a condition in any sense whatever, it is
already degraded into something in the service of beings and supervenient
to them.
Thinking in the other beginning does not know any explanation
of being by beings and knows nothing of any conditioning of beings
by beyng. Such conditioning [Bedingnis] always also places beyng in
the service of [verdingt] beings, though in such a way as to lend preeminence
to beyng in the form of the "ideal" and "values" (the ayaeov is
the beginning).
To be sure, by its very form and as a consequence of the way of
representation that has long been customary in metaphysics, and
also with the corroboration of the language and the entrenched
meaning that bear the stamp of metaphysics, any talk of beyng can
be misinterpreted and taken in terms of the ordinary relation of the
condition to be conditioned. This danger cannot be met immediately;
indeed it must be accepted as part of the dowry of metaphysics. The
378 VIII. Beyng [480-481]
history of metaphysics cannot be thrust aside when the essence of history
first comes into play in the original projection of beyng.
269. Beyng
The human being must "experience" the utter unusualness of beyng,
over and against all beings, and must be ap-propriated by it into the
truth of beyng.
Beyng is reminiscent of "nothing," but least of all is it reminiscent
of "beings," whereas every being reminds us of its like and perpetuates
its like. This perpetuation creates the usual way of representation,
which at once deteriorates such that even being (as the most general
and the continuously recollected: d. the Platonic aVcXJlVl1ol<;, which expresses
this usual way of representation) is taken as a being, the "highest"
being.
Beyng is reminiscent of "nothing," and therefore nothingness belongs
to beyng. We know little enough of this belonging. But we do
know one of its consequences, which is perhaps only in appearance as
superficial as it pretends to be: we dread and abhor "nothingness" and
believe we must always zealously devote ourselves to its condemnation,
since indeed nothingness is sheer nUllity. Yet what if the proper
motive of the flight from the (misinterpreted) nothingness were not
the willing of the "yes" and of "beings" but, instead, the aversion to the
unusualness of being? Then the usual comportment to nothingness
would harbor simply the usual comportment to beyng as well as the
avoidance of the venture of that truth in which all "ideals," "goal-settings,"
"desirables," and "resignations" come to naught on account of
their triviality and superfluousness.
The utter unusualness of beyng, over and against all beings, then
requires the unusualness of the "experience" of beyng as well. The
rarity of such experience and knowledge is therefore also not surprising.
Such knowledge cannot be brought about straightforwardly.
Rather than incite a false and fruitless striving for such a goal, we
should simply attempt to think of what pertains to such knowledge
of the completely un-usual.
By calling beyng the unusual, we thereby grasp beings of every
sort and extent as the usual, even if something new and hitherto
unknown emerges among beings and upsets what was before. With
time, we always accommodate even this novelty and incorporate beings
into beings. Yet beyng is the un-usual that not only never
emerges among beings but that also essentially withdraws from
every attempt to accommodate it.
[481-482] 379
Being is the un-usual in the sense that it is impervious to everything
usual. In order to know it, we must therefore distance ourselves
from all conventionality; because conventionality is precisely
our contribution and our constant pursuit, however, we could never
achieve this distancing on our own. Beyng itself must extract us
from beings; Le., inasmuch as we are immersed in beings, beleaguered
by them, beyng itself must un-settle us, free us from this beleaguering.
The beleaguering of humans by beings is doubled: humans
themselves are beings, pertain to beings, belong among them, but at
the same time humans have beings, precisely as such, openly round
about themselves, before, beneath, and behind themselves, within
the horizon of a whole (a world). Nevertheless, this "beleaguering"
does not signify anything that is to be eliminated, as if it were an accidental
and unseemly burden. Instead, it is integral to that which
constitutes the con-frontation of the human being (as a being in the
midst of beings) with beings. This con-frontation is not merely a type
of human undertaking (in the sense of the "struggle for existence"); it
is instead an essential jointure of the being of the human being. All
the same, there is that un-settling from beings which does not dissolve
the con-frontation but, quite to the contrary, founds it and
therefore bestows on it possibilities of groundings in which humans
create beyond themselves.
This un-settling eventuates only out of beyng itself, however; indeed
beyng is nothing other than what un-settles and is un-settling.
The un-settling consists in the ap-propriation of Dasein, specifically
such that, in the "there" which clears itself in this way (Le., in the
abyssal ground of the unsupported and unsecured), the ap-propriation
withdraws. Un-settling and withdrawing are integral to beyng as the
event. Nothing occurs amid beings thereby, and beyng remains inconspicuous.
Yet, with regard to beings as such, it can happen that they,
having been placed into the clearing of the un-usual, throw off their
usualness and then must place themselves up for de-cision as to how
they might measure up to beyng. This does of course not mean how
they might assimilate themselves to beyng or correspond to beyng;
instead, it means how they preserve and lose the truth of the essential
occurrence of beyng and thereby come to their own essence, which
consists in such preservation. The basic forms of this preservation, however,
are the disclosure of an entirety of worlding (world) and the selfseclusion
in the face of every projection (earth). These basic forms first
allow the preservation to arise, and they themselves reside within the
strife that essentially occurs out of the intimacy of the eventuation of
the event. On each respective side of this strife, there is what we know
metaphysically as the sensuous and the non-sensuous.
380 VIII. Beyng [483-484]
Why precisely this strife of world and earth? It is because Da-sein
is appropriated in the event and becomes the steadfastness of the
human being and because the human being is ca lled, out of the whole
of beings, to the stewardship of beyng. Yet what about that which is
in strife on the basis of which we have to think of the human being
and the "body," "souL" and "spirit" of this being in a way that accords
with the historicality of beyng?
Beyng un-settles by appropriating Da-sein. This un-settling is a disposing,
indeed the original tearing open of what is dispositional itself.
The basic disposition of angst withstands the un-settling, inasmuch as
this un-settling [Ent-setzen] occurs as negating in the original sense,
i.e., de-poses [ab-setzt] beings as such. In other words, this occurrence
of negation is not a simple negating but-if it must be interpreted at all
in relation to the comportment of position-taking-an affirming of
beings as such in the guise of the de-posed. The occurrence of negativity,
however, is precisely the de-posal itself, whereby beyng, as the
un-settling, consigns itself to the clearing of the appropriated "there."
Furthermore, as the occurrence of negativity by which beyng occurs
in its with -drawal, thoroughly irradiated by nothingness, beyng
essentially occurs. Only if we have liberated ourselves from misinterpreting
nothingness on the basis of beings, only if we determine
"metaphysics" on the basis of, and from, the occurrence of the negativity
of nothingness, rather than the reverse, namely, basing ourselves
on metaphysics and the priority of beings which is in force there
and thus degrading "nothingness" to a mere denial of the determinateness
and mediation of beings, as did Hegel and all metaphysicians before
him, only then will we surmise what power of steadfastness rushes
into the human being out of the "unsettlement," intended now as the
basic disposition of the "experience" of beyng. Through metaphysics,
i.e., through Christianity, we are misled and accustomed to seeing in
"unsettlement" (to which angst belongs as nothingness does to beyng)
only the wild and the ghastly instead of experiencing it as disposing
toward the truth of beyng and, on the basis of that disposition, coming
to a steadfast knowledge of the essential occurrence of beyng.
In the first beginning, inasmuch as CPU01<; was illuminated in aMe£la:
and as aA~e£la:, wonder was the basic disposition. The other beginning,
that of the thinking of the historicality of beyng, is disposed and
pre-disposed by unsettlement, which opens Da-sein to the plight of
the lack of a sense of plight. In the shelter of this plight, the abandonment
of beings by being is concealed.
§270 [484-485]
270. The essence of beyng3
(essential occurrence)
381
"Essential occurrence" names the mode in which beyng itself is; i.e.,
it names beyng. The saying "of" beyng.
Beyng essentially occurs as the indigence of god in the stewardship
of Dasein.
This essence is ap-propriation as the event in whose "between" there
plays out the strife of world and earth, from and through which these
themselves first come to their essence (Whence and how the strife?).
Beyng: the ap-propriation, reached in strzfe, toward the en-counter of gods
and humans.
Beyng is nothing "in itself" and nothing "for" a "subject." Only beingness
can appear as this sort of an "in itself" and can do so only in
the form of an effete <pUO"l<;, i.e., as iOEa, the Kae' auro ["for itself"],
something represented, an object. An extreme confinement in objectivity
befalls all attempts to find "being" and its "determinations" (categories)
in the manner of something objectively present.
Every saying of beyng (the saying "of" beyng, d. Beyng, 267.
Beyng (Event) p. 372f.) must name the appropriating event, the "between"
of the "inbetweenness" of god and Dasein, world and earth,
and, by deciding in a way that always interprets between [zwischendeutig],
must raise the ground lying between, as abyssal ground, into the
dispositional work. This saying is not univocal in the sense of the
apparently straightforward univocity of ordinary speech, but neither
is it merely polyvocal and equivocal, just as little as is such speech.
Rather, it uniquely and steadfastly names the "between" of the appropriation
that occurs in strife.
The "between" is the simple rupture that appropriates beyng in beings,
ones which have up to then been kept back from their own essence
and are still not to be called beings. This rupture is the clearing
for the concealed. The rupture does not disperse, and the clearing is
not sheer emptiness.
The rupturing "between" gathers toward the abyssal ground that
which it transposes into the open realm of its conflictual and refusing
belongingness. Out of this abyss, all things (god, the human
being, world, earth) essentially occur back into themselves and thus
allow beyng the unique decisiveness of the ap-propriation. The beyng
of such essential occurrence is itself unique in this essence. For it essentially
occurs as that stroke which has perhaps already announced
3. Cf. Beyng, 267. Beyng (Event).
382 VIII. Beyng [485-486]
itself as the extreme possibility of the decision of Western history, the
possibility that beyng itself, of such an essence, arises as the indigence
of the god, who needs the stewardship of the human being. This possibility
is itself the origin "of" beyng, and what, according to the previous
opinion about beyng, seems substantiated here in speaking of the
most general and the trans-historical is entirely, above all, and purely
and simply, the unique and the historical.
Amid everything unsupported in such questioning of the truth of
beyng, what supports the presumption that the stroke of beyng might
have already thrown a first convulsion through our history? Again it
is supported by a single circumstance, that H6lderlin had to come to
be the one who said what he did say.
Beyng is the conflictual appropriation which originarily gathers
that which is appropriated in it (the Da-sein of the human being) and
that which is refused in it (god) into the abyss of its "between." In the
clearing of the "between," world and earth contest the belonging of
their essence to the field of time-space wherein what is true comes to
be preserved. What is true, as a "being," finds itself brought in such
preservation to the simplicity of its essence in beyng (in the event).
To make such assertions about beyng does not mean to fabricate a
conceptual determination; instead, it is a preparing of the disposition
for the leap. Out of this disposition and in it, beyng itself, as projection,
is reached in a leap for the sake of the knowledge which receives
its essence as assigned to it first from this truth of beyng.
The appropriation and the contention, the grounding of history and
the decision, the uniqueness and the unity, what has the character of
the "between" and the fissured realm-these never name the essence
of beyng in its properties; instead, in each instance they name beyng
in the entire essential occurrence of its essence. To say one of them
means not merely to co-intend the others in general but to raise them
themselves to knowledge in the historically non-repeatable power of
their essential occurrence. Such knowledge does not bring any objects
to our attention and is also not an evoking or invoking of moral states
and postures. Instead, it is the transmission of the stroke of beyng itself,
and beyng as event grounds the temporal-spatial playing field for
that which is true.
If it would help at all here to name what can be visualized, then we
would have to say of fire that it first burns out its own hearth into the
ordained hardness of a site of its flame whose spreading blaze is consumed
in the brilliance of its light and therein allows the darkness of its
embers to glow so that, as hearth-fire, it might watch over the center of
the "between." The "between" becomes for the gods their unwanted yet
necessary lodging and, for the human being, the free domain of the
1 [486-487] 383
conservation of the things that in an earthly-worldly way, while preserving
what is true, arise and pass away in this freedom as beings. Only
if the things the human being as historical subsequently calls beings
break themselves against beyng (beyng is the indigence of god), only
then are all things cast back into the weight of their conceded essence.
Thus they become nameable in language and belong to the reticence in
which beyng withdraws from any calculative inclusion among beings
and yet squanders its essence in the abyssal grounding of the intimacy
of gods and world, earth and humans.
Beyng: the hearth-fire in the midst of the lodging of the gods, a
lodging which at the same time is the estrangement of the human
being (in other words, the "between" in which the human being remains
a {the} stranger, precisely when the human being becomes at
home with beings).
How to find beyng? Must we light a fire in order to find the fire,
or must we not rather reconcile ourselves to watching over the night
first? Thereby the false days of everydayness might be resisted. The
most false of those days are the ones that profess to know and to possess
even the night when they illumine and thus eliminate it with
their borrowed light.
271. Da-sein4
is what is appropriated in the event. Only out of the occurrence of
this essence does Da-sein have its proper role in the grounding stewardship
of the refusaL a stewardship that also preserves the "there."
Yet Da-sein is ap-propriated as the renunciation. Renunciation allows
the refusal (i.e., the appropriation) to protrude into the open
realm of its decisiveness.
The renunciation, by letting protrude in this way, is raised essentially
above everything that is merely negating or negated. Renunciation
is originary standing: unsupported in the unsecured (the steadfastness
of Da-sein).
This standing withstands possibility-not an arbitrary one, and not
"the" possibility in generaL but its essence. That essence, however, is the
event itself as the capacity for the most unique of the ap-propriation, a
capacity which withdraws into what is extreme. Such withdrawal
sends the harshest storm against the renunciation, bestows on it the
nearness of the abyssal ground, and thus bestows the fissure of beyng.
Of course, it is characteristic of Da-sein to "stand" down through the
4. Cf. The grounding.
384 VIII. Beyng
unsecured and unprotected into the abyssal ground and, therein, to
overreach the gods.
This reaching over the gods is a going under as grounding the truth
of beyng.
But beyng ap-propriates Da-sein for the sake of grounding its own
truth, i.e., for its clearing, because, without this clearing de-cision of
itself into the indigence of god and into the stewardship of Da -sein,
beyng would have to be consumed in the fire of its own unremitting
incandescence.
In what way could we know how many times this has indeed already
happened? If we did know that, it would then not be necessary
to think beyng in the uniqueness of its essence.
In the being that is the human being, Da-sein as steadfastness
grounds the abyssal ground which beyng throws out and yet bears in
the appropriation. The being of the human being, however, is itself
determined only out of Da-sein, inasmuch as Da-sein transforms the
human being into the stewardship of the indigence of the gods. The
human being of such an (only futmal) essence "is" not originary as
a being, since only beyng is. Nevertheless, the human being determined
in the manner of Da-sein is indeed still preeminent among
beings, inasmuch as the essence of this being is grounded on the
projection of the truth of beyng, a grounding that consigns this being,
as mediately appropriated, to beyng itself. The human being is in this
way excluded from beyng and yet is precisely thrown into the truth
of beyng, such that Dasein undergoes the exclusion in renunciation,
and this exclusion is of being. The human being stands like a bridge
in the "between," and the appropriating event, as this "between,"
propels the indigence of the gods to the stewardship of the human
being by consigning this being to Da-sein. Such propelling consignment,
from which thrownness arises, introduces into Da-sein the
transport into beyng. That transport appears to us at first as the projection
of the truth of beyng and, in the facade it offers most immediately
and readily to metaphysics, appears as the understanding of
being. Yet there is no room at all here for the interpretation of the
human being as "subject," whether in the sense of the egological or
communal subject. Nor is the transport a matter of standing outside
oneself in the sense of losing one's self. Rather, it grounds the very
essence of selfhood, which means that humans have their essence
(the stewardship of beyng) as their proper-ty [Eigen-tum] insofar as
they are grounded in Da-sein. But to have their essence as a property
means that humans must steadfastly carry out the acquisition and
loss of the fact that (as well as how) they are the appropriated ones
(the ones transported into beyng). To be the explicit proprietor of
§271 [489-490] 385
this essence authentically and to endure this authenticity steadfastly,
and also not to endure it, according to the respective a-byssal character
of the appropriation-that constitutes the essence of selfhood.
Selfhood cannot be grasped on the basis of the "subject," and certainly
not on the basis of the ''1'' or the "personality," but only through
steadfastness in the belongingness to beyng by way of stewardship,
which means only on the basis of the propulsion of the indigence of
the gods. Selfhood is the unfolding of the proprietorship of the essence.
That humans have their essence as property means this essence
is constantly in danger of being lost. And that is the resounding
of the ap-propriation; it is consignment to beyng.
Only in Da-sein, which the human being steadfastly becomes
through an essential transformation in the transition, does there occur
a preservation of beyng in something that thereby first appears as a
being. If Being and Time says that what first becomes determinable
through the "existential analytic" is the being of non-human beings,
then this does not mean the human being would be what is given primarily
and first of all and would be the measure according to which
all other beings receive the stamp of their being. Such an "interpretation"
assumes that the human being is still to be understood as understood
by Descartes and by all his followers and mere opponents (even
Nietzsche is one of the latter), namely, as a subject. The very first task,
however, is precisely to discontinue postulating the human being as a
subject and to grasp this being primarily and exclusively on the basis
of the question of being. If, despite everything, Da-sein does gain the
priority, then that means humans, grasped in terms of Da -sein, ground
their essence and the proprietorship of their essence on the projection
of being and thereby, in all comportment and restraint, keep themselves
to the realm of the clearing of beyng. This realm is nevertheless
utterly non-human; i.e., it cannot be determined and borne by the animal
rationale and just as little by the subjectum. The realm is not at all a
being; instead, it belongs to the essential occurrence of beyng. Grasped
with respect to Dasein, humans are those beings who, in being, can
incur the loss of their essence and thereby are in each case self-certain
in the most uncertain and risky way, and are so on the basis of their
consignment to the stewardship of beyng. The priority of Da-sein is
not merely contrary to every sort of anthropologizing of the human
being; it even grounds a completely different history of the essence of
the human being, a history which could never be grasped by metaphysics
or, consequently, by "anthropology." This does not exclude, but
rather includes, the fact that the human being now becomes even more
essential for beyng though at the same time less important with respect
to "beings."
386 VIII. [490-491J
Da-sein is the grounding of the abyss of beyng through the claiming
of the human being as the particular being that is consigned to stewardship
over the truth of beyng. On the basis of Da-sein, the human being
is first transformed into that being to whom the relation to beyng assigns
what is decisive, which immediately implies that the talk of a relation
to beyng expresses the opposite of what is properly to be thought.
For the relation to beyng is in truth beyng, which, as event, places the
human being in this relation. Therefore many misunderstandings surround
the "relation" indicated in the formula "the human being and
beyng" (d. Beyng, 272. The human being and 273. History).
272. The human beingS
To someone who has grasped the history of the human being as the
history of the essence of this being, the question of who the human
being is can only signify the need to question this being outside the
sphere of the previous metaphysical residence of humans, to refer the
human being to another essence in this questioning, and to overcome
thereby the question of who the human being is. This questioning
still stands unavoidably in the guise of "anthropology" and is
in danger of being misunderstood as anthropology.
1. What peaks must we scale in order to survey the human being
freely in the plight of the essence of this being? The fact that the
essence of the human being is to this being a property, i.e., a loss,
and indeed out of the essential occurrence of beyng.
Why are such peaks necessary, and what do they mean?
2. Has the human being obstinately strayed into "mere" beings? Or
was the human being therefore rejected by beyng? Then again,
was the human being simply forsaken by beyng and abandoned to
egotism?
(These questions move within the difference between being
and beings.)
3. The human being, the thinking animaL as objectively present
source of passions, drives, aims, valuings, and as endowed with a
character, etc. That which can be ascertained at any time and is
certain of everyone's approvaL especially if everyone has agreed
to question no longer and to let nothing else be except what each
is:
a) what we encounter the human being as.
b) that we encounter the human being.
5. Cf. Beyng, 276. Beyng and language, p. 393f., and Uberlegungen VIII.
§273 [491-493] 387
4. The human being the one who has turned back in self-casting
loose (Le., in the thrown projection); we must understand being,
if ...
s. The human being the steward of the truth of beyng (grounding of
Da-sein).
6. The human being neither the "subject" nor the "object" of "history"
but only that which is wafted along by history (the event)
and swept up into beyng, that which belongs to beyng. The call of
the indigence, consignment to stewardship.
7. The human being as the stranger who undergoes the casting loose,
who no longer returns from the abyssal ground, and who retains the
remote proximity to beyng in this foreign realm.
273. History
Previously, the human being was never historical, although indeed this
being "had" and "has" a history. Yet this having a history betrays immediately
the only kind of "history" in view here. History is always
determined by the "historiological," even when the intention is to
grasp historical reality itself and delimit it in its essence. That happens
in part "ontologically" (historical reality as reality of becoming) and in
part "epistemologically" (history as the ascertainable past). Both interpretations
depend on that which made "ontology" and "epistemology"
possible, namely, metaphysics. The presuppositions of historiology are to
be sought there as well.
If the human being is to be historical, however, and if the essence
of history is to be known, then the essence of the human being must
become questionable above all and being must become questionworthy,
indeed question-worthy for the first time. History can be
grounded only in the essence of beyng itself, Le., only in the relation
of beyng to the human being who is equal to that relation.
To be sure, it is impossible to calculate whether the human being
will attain history, whether the essence of history will befall beings,
and whether historiology can be destroyed; these matters rest with
beyng itself.
The main difficulty preventing even a first clarification of these
questions is the fact that we can scarcely detach ourselves from historiology,
especially since we can no longer at all survey the extent
to which historiology, in manifold hidden forms, dominates human
being [Seinj. It is not by accident that "modernity" brings historiology
into proper dominance. Today, at the start of the decisive phase of
modernity, this dominance already extends so far that historiology
388 VIII. Beyng [493-494]
determines the understanding of history in such a way that history is
thrust aside into what lacks history, and its essence is sought therein.
Blood and race become the bearers of history. Pre-historiology gives
historiology its now valid character. The way humans bustle about and
calculate, put themselves into the scene and into comparisons, the
way humans order the past for themselves as background of their present,
the way they spread the present out into an eternity-all this is
evidence of the reign of historiology.
But what is meant here by historiology? It is the explanation which
establishes facts about the past out of the horizon of a calculative
bustling about with the present. Beings are thereby preconceived as
the orderable, the producible, and the establishable (iota).
Establishing is in service to a retention whose aim is not so much
to prevent the past from slipping away as it is to eternalize the present
as that which is objectively present. Eternalizing, as a striving, is always
a consequence of the dominance of historiology; it is an apparently
prescribed flight of history from history. Eternalizing is the not
ridding itself of itself (as something objectively present) of a present
that is far from history.
Historiology, as this establishing, is a constant comparing, the introduction
of an other, wherein the human being is mirrored as one
who has made progress, a comparing which thinks away from itself
because it can not cope with itself.
Historiology spreads the illusion that we can gain complete mastery
over all reality, and it does so by adhering to everything superficial
and displacing the surface itself which it takes as the only sufficient
reality. Historiology, as implying an unlimited knowledge of
all things, in all respects, and with all the means of presentation, i.e.,
as implying disposal over everything factual, leads to an exclusion
from history. The more decisive this exclusion becomes, the more
unrecognizable it is to those who are excluded.
Historiology, in its preliminary forms, in its development into science,
and in the leveling down and intelligibility of this science to
common calculation, is utterly a consequence of metaphysics, i.e., a
consequence of the history of beyng, of beyng as history. Thereby,
however, beyng and history remain completely concealed, indeed
they even withhold themselves in this concealment.
History is beyng as appropriating event and must receive the determination
of its essence on that basis, i.e., independently of any notion of becoming or development,
independently of historiological considerations and explanations.
Therefore the essence of history can also not be grasped through an
orientation toward the historiological "object," the object investigated,
§274 [494-495] 389
instead of proceeding from the historiological "subject," the subject
conducting the investigation. What is the object of historiology then
supposed to be? Is "objective historiology" merely an un-attainable
goal? It is not a possible goal at all. Then there is also no "subjective"
historiology. Historiology, by its very essence, is grounded on the
subject-object relation. Historiology is objective because it is subjective,
and insofar as it is the latter, it must also be the former. Therefore
an "opposition" between "subjective" and "objective" historiology is
entirely senseless. All historiology ends in an anthropologicalpsychological
biographism.
274. Beings and calculation
Calculative planning makes beings ever more representable and,
from all possible explanatory viewpoints, more accessible, indeed
such that these capacities to be controlled are for their part unified
among themselves, become more prevalent, and thus expand beings
into what is in appearance without limit-but precisely only in appearance.
In truth, with the ever-greater compass of research (historiology
in the broadest sense) there is carried out a displacement of
the gigantic from that which undergoes the planning to the planning
itself. The moment planning and calculation become gigantic, beings
as a whole start to shrink. The "world" becomes ever smaller, not
only in the quantitative sense but also in its metaphysical significance:
beings as beings, i.e., as objects, are ultimately so dissolved
into their controllability that the character of beings with respect to
being disappears, so to speak, and the abandonment of beings by
being is consummated.
The metaphysical diminution of the "world" produces an eroding
of the human being. The relation to beings as such no longer has a
goal in them or with them, and the relation, as a comportment of the
human being, relates only to itself and to the planning for which it is
carried out. The feeling of emotion feels nothing but feeling, and
emotion itself becomes the object of pleasure. "Lived experience"
reaches the extremity of its essence, and lived experiences become
objects of lived experiences. The lostness in beings is lived as the capacity
to transform "life" into the calculable whirl of an empty selfcircling
and to make this capacity credible as "closeness to life."
390 VIII.
275. Beings
Preservation of beyng (preservation in the historicality of the event).
Why? So that the gods, in self-accord, might come to truth in beings
and beyng might smolder and yet not burn out. But the danger.
Beings "as a whole"? Does the "whole" now still have any necessity?
Does it not come into ruin as the last remainder of "systematic"
thinking?
How old is the OAOV ["whole"] in the history of being? As old as the
£v? (The first concept by which cpucn<; is gathered into the constancy
of presence.)
"Beings": why does that term always signify to us in the first place
precisely what is objectively present here and now? (Whence this
priority of the present?) What if the way to ob-jectivity is no longer a
way to beings?
What if "nature," a confused offspring of CPUOl<; (which returned to its
beginning), reaches down into beings no longer and counts to us today
merely as a way of ordering and representing beings? As if "nature," in
the guises of the object of natural science and the exploitation of technology,
might still in some fashion touch beings, even only such that
"philosophy" could be called in to eke out "nature," a philosophy that
has long since made itself at home only in the objectivity of these objects
(epistemologically and ontologically, i.e., representationally).
What if we seek refuge in Goethe's intuition of nature, however,
and then turn even the "earth" and "life" into a theory?
What if wallowing in the irrational commences, and then everything
remains all the more in its previous state? Indeed, what if this
state is now completely confirmed without restriction? That must still
occur, for modernity could not otherwise find its consummation.
Romanticism has not yet been brought to its end and once again
attempts a transfiguration of beings. This transfiguration, however, as
a re-action against the prevailing explanations and calculations,
merely endeavors to establish itself beyond these or beside them. The
historiological renewal of "culture" is "called upon" for the sake of
this transfiguration such that this renewal strives to root itself in the
"people" and to communicate itself to everyone.
This popularization of "metaphysics" effectuates a revitalizing of
the past; what lay fallow is again heeded and sheltered and becomes
a source of pleasure and edification. Moreover, compared to what
has apparently become old, something new seems to rise up. Nevertheless,
everything here moves in indecision, inasmuch as beings
[497-498] 391
themselves remain unquestioned with respect to beyng and, despite
their expansion and revitalization, vanish inconspicuously, leaving
behind merely a semblance of themselves in the guise of objects.
276. Beyng and Zanguage6
1. Language as assertion and saying.
2. The saying of beyng.
3. Beyng and the origin of language. Language the echo which belongs
to the event. In this echo, the event bestows itself as the
reaching of the strife in the strife itself (earth-world). (Consequence:
the wearing out and mere employment of language.)
4. Language and the human being. Is language given concomitantly
with the human being, or the human being concomitantly with
language? Or does the one become and exist through the other, so
that they are not at all two different entities? And why? Because
both belong equiprimordially to beyng. Why the human being "essential"
to the determination of the essence of language-the
human being as? the steward of the truth of beyng.
5. The animal rationale and the misinterpretation of language.
6. Language and logic.
7. Language, beingness, and beings.
Within the history of metaphysics (and thus within all of previous
philosophy), A6yo~ guides the determination of language, whereby
A6yo~ is taken as assertion, and this latter as the conjunction of representations.
Language takes over the assertion of beings. At the
same time, language, still as A6yo~, is assigned to the human being
(~Qov lI.oyov £xov ["the animal possessing discourse"]). The basic relations
of language (out of these the "essence" and "origin" of language
are deduced) extend to beings as such and to the human being.
According to the interpretation of the animal rationale and according
to the way of comprehending the connection of ratio (word) with
beings and with what is most eminently (deus), there result various
sorts of "philosophy of language." Even if the term "philosophy of
language" is not explicitly used, language as a present-at-hand object
(tool-a product capable of giving form to things and a divine gift) is
included alongside other objects (art, nature, etc.) in the domain of
philosophical considerations. As surely as it may be granted that this
special product indeed accompanies all representing and thus extends
over the entire domain of beings as a mode of expressing them,
6. Cf. Beyng, 267. Beyng (Event), p. 372f.
392 VIII. Beyng [498-499]
just as little does this consideration thereby transcend the initial determination
of language in which language is posited, indeterminately
enough, in relation to beings and in relation to the human
being. There has hardly been an attempt, out of this relation to language
and on the basis of language, to grasp more originally the essence
of the human being and the stance of this being toward beings,
as well as the reverse. For that would already require language to be
posited, as it were, free of all relation. But then in what is language
supposed to be grounded, since language as something objectively
present in itself manifestly runs counter to all experience?
Moreover, if we reflect that language "in general" never exists but
that it can be only as unhistorical (the "language" of people in a socalled
state of nature) and as historical, and if we also fathom how
obscure to us is the essence of history, despite the clear findings of
historiology, then likewise all attempts to grasp the "essence" of language
will seem confused at the outset. All historiological compilations
of previous views of language may be informative, but they
could never take us beyond the entrenched metaphysical approach of
relating language to the human being and to beings. Yet this is indeed
the first real question: as regards the interpretation of language
on the basis of A6yoc:" an interpretation that is even necessary historically
and inceptually and that pre delineates an incorporation into
the metaphysical approach of relating language-did not this interpretation
restrict the possibility of a determination of the essence of
language to the sphere of metaphysical reflection? Yet if we now recognize
metaphysics itself and its questioning in their essential
restriction to the question of beingness, and if we achieve the insight
that this metaphysical questioning of beings as a whole can nevertheless
not ask about everything that is and certainly not about the
most essential, namely, beyng itself and its truth, then another prospect
opens up here: beyng and nothing less than its most proper
essential occurrence could indeed constitute that ground of language
whereby language would draw the capacity to first determine out
of itself that in relation to which language is metaphysically
explained.
The first real question, which at once brings to naught all philosophy
of language as such (i.e., as metaphysics of language and consequently
as psychology of language, etc.), is the question of the relation
of language to beyng, a question which in this form admittedly
does not yet reach what is in question. But this relation can be clarified
on a path that at the same time keeps in sight the particular
domain that always guided the previous consideration of language.
§276 [499-500J 393
According to the correctly understood and hitherto valid determination
of the human being as animal rationale, language is given concomitantly
with this being, so surely that the converse also holds: the human
being is given only concomitantly with language. Language and the
human being determine each other reciprocally. How does that become
possible? Are they both in a certain respect the same, and in what respect
are they so? In virtue of their belonging to beyng. What does it
mean to belong to beyng? The human being, as a being, belongs among
beings and so is subject to the most general determination according to
which the human being is and is such and such. But this does not distinguish
the human being as the human being; it merely makes this
being, as a being, equal to all other beings. Yet the human being can
belong to beyng (and not merely belong among beings) insofar as this
being draws out of such belongingness, precisely out of it, the most originary
human essence: the human being understands being (d. Being
and Time); the human being is the deputy of the projection ofbeyng, and
the stewardship of the truth of beyng constitutes the essence of the
human being as grasped out of beyng and "only" out of it. The human
being belongs to beyng as the one appropriated by beyng itself for the
sake of the grounding of its truth. As so appropriated, the human being
is consigned to beyng, and such consignment indicates the preserving
and grounding of this human essence in that which human beings
themselves must first make their explicit property (with reference to
which they must be more authentic and more inauthentic), i.e., in Dasein,
which is itself the grounding of truth, the abyssal ground thrown
out and borne by beyng (event).
But how does language relate to beyng? If we may not consider
language something given and thus something whose essence is already
fixed (since the task is first to "find" its essence), and if beyng
itself is "more essential" than language (insofar as language is taken as
something given, a being), then the question must be posed in a different
way.
How does beyng relate to language? Yet in this formulation as
well, the question may be misunderstood, inasmuch as it now merely
reverses the earlier relationship and again takes language as something
given, to which beyng establishes a relation. To ask how beyng
relates to language is to pose the question, how does the essence of
language originate in the essential occurrence of beyng? It would
seem, however, that the answer is already presupposed thereby: language
originates precisely out of beyng. But every genuinely essential
question, as a projection, is determined on the basis of what is to
be projected and so anticipates its own answer. The essence of language
can indeed never be determined otherwise than by naming
394 VIII. Beyng [500-502]
the origin of language. Accordingly. it is impossible to proffer essen~
tial definitions of language while at the same time maintaining that
the question of its origin is unanswerable. The question of the origin
necessarily includes an essential determination of the origin and of
the origination itself. Origination, however, signifies belongingness
to beyng in the sense of the question posed just now: How does language
essentially occur in the essential occurrence of beyng? Now,
this relation of language to beyng is by no means an arbitrary construct,
as our preliminary consideration has made clear. For, in truth,
that metaphysical (but not thought back to its origin) double relation
of language to beings as such and to the human being (as animal rationale,
ratio-guideline for the interpretation of beings in their beingness,
Le., in their being) says nothing other than this: language is
related to being through and through and precisely in those respects
according to which metaphysics determines language. Yet because
metaphysics is at all what it is only from perplexity with regard to
beyng, therefore precisely this relation and, ultimately, its right formulation
can never enter the domain of metaphysical questioning.
Language originates from beyng and therefore belongs to beyng.
Thus everything once again becomes a matter of projection and of
the thinking "of" beyng. But we must now think beyng in such a
way that we thereby at the same time remember language. Yet how
are we now supposed to grasp "the language," without grasping in
advance something of the determination of the essence, which is first
to be acquired? Obviously in such a way, from everything already
indicated, that language becomes experience able in its relation to
beyng. But how is that possible? "The" language is "our" language:
"ours" not only as the mother tongue but also as the language of our
history. Thereby we are overtaken by what is ultimately questionworthy
within meditation on "the" language.
Our history: not as the historiologically familiar course of our capacities
and accomplishments, but we ourselves in the moment of our relation
to beyng. For the third time we are falling into the abyss of that relation.
This time we have no answer, since all meditation on beyng and on
language is indeed merely a sighting shot in order to hit the mark,
namely, our "position" in beyng itself and, accordingly, our history. Even
when we want to grasp our language in its relation to beyng, this questioning
is still encumbered with the familiar determination of language
from the previous metaphysics. Yet of this determination it cannot be
said, without further ado, that it is utterly untrue, especially since it has
in view-even if in a veiled way-language precisely in its relation to
being (Le., to beings as such and to the human being who represents beings,
thinks of beings). Right after the character of language as assertion
§276 [502-503] 395
(taking assertion in the widest sense, according to which language, the
spoken and unspoken, means and represents something, namely, a
being, and through representation configures or conceals that being,
etc.), language is immediately familiar as a possession and tool of the
human being and also as a "work." But this connection between language
and the human being is taken to be so intimate that the basic
determinations of the human being (again as animal rationale) are chosen
to characterize language as well. The bodily-psychic-spiritual essence
of the human being is found again in language: the body of language
(the word), the soul of language (the mood, the felt tone, etc.),
and the spirit of language (that which is thought and represented) are
conventional determinations in all philosophy of language. This ("anthropological")
interpretation of language reaches a peak when it sees
in language itself a symbol of the human essence. If the problematic
character of the notion of symbol (a genuine offspring of the perplexity
regarding beyng which reigns in metaphysics) is here disregarded, then
the human being would accordingly have to be grasped as that living
being whose essence lies precisely in that by which it is symbolized, i.e.,
precisely in the possession of this symbol (A6yov EXOV). We will have to
leave open how far this metaphysical interpretation of language in
terms of symbols, if thought through to the end, could be led beyond
itself by the thinking of being in its historicality and could thereby yield
fruit. Undeniably, that which in language provides a basis for taking it
as a symbol for the human being also touches something that in a certain
way is indeed proper to language: the sound and phonetic structure
of the word, the tone and meaning of the word. Yet we are again hereby
thinking in the horizon of the metaphysical distinction between the
sensible, the nonsensible, and the supersensible, even if we mean by
"word" not individual vocables but the uttering and keeping silent of
what is said and what is not said and this latter itself. The sound of the
word can be traced back to the anatomical and physiological properties
of the human body and explained on that basis (phonetics-acoustics).
Likewise, the mood and melody of the word and the emotional emphasis
of an utterance are objects of psychological explanation. And as to
the meaning of the word, it is a matter for logical, poetic, and rhetorical
dissection. These explanations and analyses of language obviously depend
on the particular way of apprehending the human being.
If now, however, with the overcoming of metaphysics, anthropology
also collapses, and if the essence of humanity is determined with
respect to beyng, then that anthropological explanation of language
can no longer be paradigmatic; its grounds have crumbled. Nevertheless-
indeed even now for the first time in its full power-there remains
that which was captured about language in referring to its body,
396 VIII. Beyng [503-504]
soul, and spirit. What is that? Can we now. while correspondingly
thinking in terms of the historicality of being, simply proceed in such
a way that we interpret the essence of language out of the determination
of human beings which takes its bearings from the historicality of
being? No; for we are thereby still caught up in the notion of symbol.
Above all, however, that would vitiate the task of grasping the origin
of language out of the essential occurrence of beyng itself.
277. "Metaphysics" and the origin of the work of art
The question of the origin of the work of art is not intent on an eternally
valid determination of the essence of the work of art, a determination
that could also serve as a guideline for the historiological survey
and explanation of the history of art. Instead, the question stands in
the most intrinsic connection to the task of overcoming aesthetics, i.e.,
overcoming a particular conception of beings-as objects of representation.
The overcoming of aesthetics again results necessarily from the
historical confrontation with metaphysics as such. Metaphysics contains
the basic Western position toward beings and thus also the
ground of the previous essence of Western art and of its works. Overcoming
metaphysics means giving free rein to the priority of the question
of the truth of being over every "ideal," "causal," "transcendental,"
or "dialectical" explanation of beings. The overcoming of metaphysics
is not a repudiation of philosophy hitherto, but is a leap into its first
beginning, although without wanting to reinstate that beginning. Indeed,
such a reinstating is not actual for historiology and not possible
for history. Nevertheless, meditation on the first beginning (out of the
necessity of preparing the other beginning) leads to an esteeming of inceptual
(Greek) thought, which promotes the misunderstanding that
this return to the Greeks is striving for some sort of "classicism" in philosophy.
In truth, however, the "retrieval" -i.e., the more originary
launching-of this questioning opens the solitary remoteness of the
first beginning to everything that follows it historically. Ultimately, the
other beginning stands to the first in a necessary, intrinsic, though
concealed relation which includes at the same time the complete isolation
of both, in accord with their character as origins. Thus, precisely
where preparatory thinking most readily attains the sphere of the origin
of the other beginning, the illusion arises that the first beginning is
merely renewed and that the other beginning is simply a historiologically
improved interpretation of the first.
What holds in general for "metaphysics" also applies to meditation on
the "origin of the work of art" (a meditation that prepares a historically
§277 [504-506] 397
transitional decision), and what is early of the first beginning can be
chosen as the most apt illustration in this case as well. Yet at the same
time it must be acknowledged that what essentially occurs in Greek art
can never be touched-and never wants to be touched-by what we
need to unfold as essential knowledge about "the" art.
Nevertheless, the task here is always to think historically, i.e., to
be historical, instead of calculating historiologically. The question of
"classicism," the overcoming of the "classicist" misinterpretation and
misprizing of the "classical," and likewise the characterization of a
history as "classical" are not questions about the position taken toward
art; instead, they concern a decision for or against history.
Eras which, through historicism, know a great deal and forthwith
know everything, will not understand that a moment of history
which is without art can be more historical and more creative than
eras of widespread bustle over art. The absence of art does not derive
here from inability and decline but from the power of knowing the
essential decisions. That which has occurred hitherto-and seldom
enough-as art must proceed through these decisions. Within the
horizon of this knowledge, art loses its relation to culture; art manifests
itself here only as an event of beyng. The absence of art is grounded
in the knowledge that the exercise of fully developed talents deriving
from the most consummate mastery of the rules, even following the
highest previous standards and models, can never be "art"; that
planned arrangements for the production of things corresponding to
previous "works or art" and to their "goals" can yield extensive results
without an originary necessity for the essence of art (its bringing
the truth of beyng into decision) ever making itself compelling
on the basis of a need; and that the bustling about with "art" (as a
business resource) has already placed itself outside the essence of art
and therefore is precisely too blind and overly weak to experience, or
even to "validate," the absence of art in the power of this absence, as
assigned to beyng, for preparing history. The absence of art is grounded
in the knowledge that the approval and agreement of those for whom
"art" is a matter of enjoyment and lived experience can decide nothing
as to whether the object of enjoyment stems at all from the essential
domain of art or is merely an illusory product of historiological
cleverness, borne by the prevailing goals of the age.
As to the knowledge whereby the absence of art is already historical
without being publicly known or conceded within a constantly
increasing "artistic activity," this knowledge itself pertains to the essence
of an original appropriation which we call Da-sein. Steadfastness
in Da-sein prepares the disintegration of the priority of beings
and thus prepares the un-usualness and un-naturalness of another
398 VIll.Beyng[506-507]
origin of "art": the beginning of a hidden history of the reticence of
an abyssal encounter between gods and humans.
278. Origin of the work of art
I. Schinkel's thesis: "With [Rei] the sensibility the Greek people had
for leaving behind for posterity all sorts of memorials to their existence
and work, there emerged the multifarious artistic activities ... "7
1. With the sensibility: "together with" the sensibility or "from" the
sensibility?
2. Is weight placed only on the explanation of the emergence of the
multifariousness of art or on the emergence of art itself?
3. Artistic activity: "art" and activity in it or to let the essence of art itself
first arise as necessary?
Activity in it, various "grounds," various directions and levels
of accounting for the "emergence":
a) ground of the essence (origin of the essence out of the essential
occurrence of beyng). Cf. VI below.
b) motives, commissions, imitations.
c) impulses and incentives (needs and drives).
d) conditions (aptitudes, skills).
e) aywv ["contest"], self-surpassing, but not for the sake of setting
new records; instead, for the sake of 156~a ["glory"].
f) the metaphysical ground of the aywv.
4. "Posterity," indeterminate:
a) in the modern historiological sense: the West, historiological
formation, "immortalizing."
b) in the Greek sense: for one's own people, but then no "eternity,"
not so that precisely those who come later (any ones whatever or
specifically the West) might have a historiological memory of
them, "memorials," but so that the Greeks themselves might keep
these things among themselves as their possessions; so the Greeks
remain present in their presencing (156~a), but not "nationalistically"
-instead, metaphysically.
II. 156~a and ioea ["outward show"], the Greek sense of glory and
praise: to step forth into appearance, Le., to belong amid the proper beings
and to codetermine them (KMo<; ["repute"]) and thus to be
7. K. F. SchinkeL Aus Schinkels Nachlass: Reisetagebiicher, Briefe, und Aphorismen.
Mitgeteilt von. A. v. Wolzogen. Reprint ofthe edition of 1862. (Mittenwald: 1981),
Bd. III, p. 368.-Ed.
§279 [507-508] 399
assigned to the gods. l56~a: presence in the presencing of one's own
self-unfolding essence and the belonging to this essence.
But:
III. High Greek era (Pindar and earlier figures) and Plato, reverberation,
"glory" already fame.
And above all:
IV. Even in the highest era: only moments, uniqueness, no condition
and rule, no ideal.
V. Modern conception giving prominence to the activity, the work as
a feat, "genius," and correspondingly the "work" as feat. Finally art
altogether a means for cultural politics.
VI. Question of the origin: "the" origin always historical in the sense
that the essence itself has the character of historical event.
The ad of the Greeks is not the historiologically conceived duration
of progressive and endless continuance; instead, it is the constancy
of the presencing of the inexhaustible essence.
The Greeks were unhistoriological; their 10'LOPEtV [historein, "investigating"]
was directed toward what is objectively present in the
present, not toward the past as such.
Yet the Greeks were indeed historical, so originally historical that
history itself still remained concealed to them, i.e., did not become
the essential ground of the configuration of their "existence."
The aEl not the presencing of the continuous but the simplification
of what is in each case essential (the EV as QV), a simplification that
gathers into the present.
279. But what of the godS?8
Not out of "religion"; not as objectively present; not as expedients of
the human being; instead, out of beyng, as its decision, futural in the
uniqueness of what is last.
Why must this decision be ventured? Because the necessity of beyng is
thereby raised to the highest question-worthiness, and the freedom
of the human being (the fact that the human being can set into the
lowest depth the fulfillment of the human essence) is abyssally thrust
down, since in that way being is brought into the truth of the simplest
intimacy of its ap-propriation. And what then "is"? Then for the
first time this question is impossible; then for a moment the event of
ap-propriation is the event. This moment is the time of being.
8. Cf. The last god.
400 VIII. Beyng [508-509]
Beyng, however, is the indigence of the god, and in this indigence
the god first finds himself. But why the god? Whence the indigence?
Because the abyss is concealed? Since a surpassing takes place, the
surpassed are therefore still the higher. Whence the surpassing, abyssal
ground, ground, being? In what does the divinity of the gods consist?
Why beyng? Because of the gods? Why gods? Because of beyng?
The appropriating event and the possibility of the why! Can the
"why" still be made into a tribunal before which beyng is to be haled?
But why the truth of beyng? This truth belongs to the essence of
beyng!
Why beings? Because a highest being causes them, produces them?
Notwithstanding the inappropriateness of the notion of production,
the highest being, summum ens, belongs all the more to beings.
How is the "why" supposed to be answered on that basis? Why beings?
Why? Wherefore? To what extent? Reasons! Ground and origin
of the "why." In each case beyond beings. Whereto? Because
being essentially occurs. Why beyng? Out of itself. But what is it itself?
The creative grounding of beyng, of its ground, is the "between"
of beyng as abyssal ground. Abyssal knowledge as Da-sein. Da-sein
as ap-propriated. Ground-less; abyssal.
280. The transitional question
The transitional question (Why are there beings at all and not rather
nothing? Cf. S.s. 19359 ) asks about beings and at first is to be developed
exclusively in that way in order to come unexpectedly before
an essential step: the hovering of beyng.
Just as the asking of this question in metaphysics is already set
into the "space" of beyng, since such asking is brought to an extremity
(difference between the Middle Ages and Leibniz or Schelling), so
also the same holds for the run-up to the leap into beyng.
The metaphysical form of the question: supreme cause, ens entium!
No answer, because not asked.
And nothingness? Its continuance? And the "why"? Its ground?
And the question itself? As the thinking "of" beyng.
9. Lecture course, Einfuhrung in die Metaphysik, summer semester 1935
(GA40).
§281 [510]
281. Language
(its origin)
401
When the gods call the earth, and when in the call a world echoes and
thus the call resonates as the Da-sein of the human being, then language
exists as historical, as the word that grounds history.
Language and event. Sounding forth of the earth, resounding of the
world. Strife, the original securing of the fissure, because the innermost
rift. The open place.
Language, whether spoken or silent, the first and most extensive humanizing
of beings. So it seems. But language precisely the most original
dehumanizing of the human being as an objectively present living
being and "subject" and everything hitherto. Thereby the grounding of
Da-sein and of the possibility of the dehumanizing of beings.
Language is grounded in silence. Silence is the most concealed
holding to the measure. It holds to the measure, in the sense that it
first posits measures. Language is thus the positing of measures in
that which is most internal and most extensive, the positing of measures
as the originating essential occurrence of what is fitting and of
its joining (the event). And insofar as language is the ground of Dasein,
there lies in Da-sein a moderation, indeed as the ground of the
strife of world and earth.

EDITOR'S AFTERWORD
Martin Heidegger's second magnum opus, Contributions to Philosophy
(Of the Event), is here appearing for the first time, more than a half
century after its composition and in the year marking the lOOth anniversary
of the thinker's birth. Its appearance inaugurates the publication
of the volumes that are to compose division III of his Gesamtausgabe
["Complete Edition," abbr. GA].
Following up the initial approach to the question of being in Being
and Time, that is, in the context of fundamental ontology, Contributions
to Philosophy can be said to constitute the first comprehensive attempt at a
second, "more originary" approach to and elaboration of the same
question in the context of the historicality of beyng. Heidegger is here
asking for the meaning of beyng, understood as its truth and essence,
in other words, as its essential occurrence, and this essential occurrence
is thought as event. Therefore, intrinsically connected to the "official
title," Contributions to Philosophy, is the "fitting rubric," Of the Event.
Although this thinking understands itself to be "a projection of the
essential occurrence of beyng as the event," it is "not yet able to join
the free conjuncture of the truth of beyng out of beyng itself." This
thinking is still under way toward such a joining. Nevertheless, in
Contributions to Philosophy the elaboration of the question of being
within the historicality of beyng does attain for the first time the
structure of an "outline" articulated into six parts. This outline is said
to be "taken from the still unmastered ground-plan of the historicality
of the transition itself," the "transition from metaphysics to the thinking
of beyng in its historicality." Within this outline, the questioning of
beyng in its historicality opens with the "'resonating' of beyng in the
plight of the abandonment by being" and is carried out "in the 'interplay'
between the first and the other beginning," as a thoughtful '''leap'
into beyng," as the thoughtful '''grounding' of the truth of beyng," and
as thoughtfully "preparing the 'future ones' of 'the last god.'" A "Prospect"
precedes this outline and surveys the whole of it in advance. By
404 Editor's Afterword
way of a conclusion to Contributions to Philosophy, the section named
"Beyng" follows the outline and looks back in an "attempt to grasp the
whole once again." The thinking of the essence of beyng as event
thinks the "richness of the turning relation of beyng to the Da-sein it
appropriates" and thereby thinks the essence of the human beingthat
is, thinks Da-sein-out of the turning, which itself belongs within
the essence of beyng as the event.
The motto of the Gesamtausgabe, "Ways-not works," is elucidated at
the very beginning of Contributions to Philosophy. This is not a '''work' in
the previous style," since the thinking of beyng in its historicality is a
"course of thought," on which "the hitherto altogether concealed realm
of the essential occurrence of beyng is traversed and so is first cleared
and attained in its most proper character as an event."
The eminent position of Contributions to Philosophy within his path of
thought is indicated by Heidegger himself in a marginal remark included
in his "Letter on Humanism." He notes that what is said there
was "not first thought at the time the letter was composed," thus in
1946, but lies instead "on the course of a way that began in 1936, at the
'moment' of an attempt to say the truth of being simply."! The beginning
of that way in 1936 consists precisely in Heidegger's starting to
compose Contributions to Philosophy. A second marginal remark in the
"Letter on Humanism," drawing out the first one, says: "'Event' has
been the word guiding my thinking since 1936,"2 i.e., since the beginning
of the working out of Contributions to Philosophy.
This crucial text opens the way and yet was not published to inaugurate
the Gesamtausgabe but instead is only appearing now, fourteen
years after the first volumes in the series. The reason lies in one of
Heidegger's directives for the publication of the Gesamtausgabe, a directive
that was of particular importance to him. It stipulated that
publication of the writings assigned to divisions III and IV could
commence only after the lecture courses of divisions II were brought
out. Heidegger explained this decision by remarking that knowledge
and appropriating study of the lecture texts were necessary prerequisites
for understanding the unpublished writings, especially those
from the 1930s and the first half of the 1940s. This directive was
satisfied insofar as, in the fourteen years intervening since the publication
of the Gesamtausgabe began in November 1975, most of the
lecture volumes have now appeared or will appear in the course of
1. "Brief fiber den Humanismus," in Wegmarken (GA9), p. 313. [Translated by
Frank A. Capuzzi as "Letter on 'Humanism,'" in Pathmarks (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1998, p. 239 n.)]
2. Ibid., p. 316. [English translation, ibid., p. 241 n.]
Editor's Afterword 405
this anniversary year. Accordingly, only a few lecture courses remain
unpublished at present, and they have already been entrusted
to editors for preparation and will also come out in the near future.
Of the lecture courses from the 1930s, whose study is necessarily
demanded for a comprehension of Contributions to Philosophy, the most
prominent of all is the one from the winter semester 1937-38, Basic
Questions of Philosophy: Selected "Problems" of"Logic" [Grundfragen der Philosophie:
Ausgewiihlte "Probleme" der "Logik"]. In this course, Heidegger
develops the question of truth as a precursory question to the basic
question of beyng; he thereby communicates-in lecture style and
thus paying heed to the requirements of a teaching situation-a train
of thought essential to Contributions to Philosophy. Therefore, a study of
that lecture course, which was published in 1984 as volume 45 of the
Gesamtausgabe, is the most important-because the most immediatepreparation
for understanding Contributions to Philosophy. If the latter is
compared especially to two texts published in the appendix of volume
45-the text "From the First Draft" and the preceding one, which is a
complete outline for the unfolding of the question of truth-then it
becomes clear how those texts originate in the just-elaborated Contributions
to Philosophy.
*
The manuscript of Contributions to Philosophy contains 933 standard
letter-size pages, with only a few exceptions in smaller size. The text as
a whole is divided into eight parts, and those into 281 sections of varying
length, each section with its own title. Each section also bears its
own number, and the sections are numbered consecutively throughout
the entire text. The section numbers are found on the bottom left
of the first page of that section. If a section is more than one page in
length, then a number on the top right indicates the pagination within
the section. The pages are also numbered consecutively throughout
the entire manuscript; those numbers are found on the top left.
According to the order of the eight parts in the manuscript, and
likewise according to the order of the sections within these parts as
indicated by the consecutive section numbers, what follows the "Prospect"
and is thus part II is "Beyng." At the end of the typewritten
transcription of the table of contents, however, Heidegger made this
annotation on May 8, 1939: '''Beyng' as Division (Part) II is not well
placed; as an attempt to grasp the whole once again, it does not belong
in that position." Acting upon this annotation, I have made the part
titled "Beyng" the conclusion and thus have placed it after the last part
of the outline. Heidegger's handwritten remark on the title page of
"Beyng" demonstrates unequivocally that that text has not at all been
406 Editor's Afterword
falsely assigned to this book; the remark reads, "Concerns Contributions
to Philosophy (Of the Event)." Through the repositioning of this part,
whereby it is no longer part II but part VIII, the numbering of the sections
also changes, from 50 on. The "Prospect" contains 49 sections; in
the manuscript as well as in the typed transcription, section 50 is the
first one in the part named "Beyng." Now, after my repositioning, the
section that bears the number 50 is the first section of "The resonating"
(which is the first part of the "outline").
The handwritten title page to the manuscript as a whole is inscribed
Contributions to Philosophy (Of the Event). Accordingly, the title
incudes not only the "official" one but also the "fitting" rubric, although
Heidegger does place the latter as such in parentheses. The
title page indicates that the manuscript was written in the years
1936-37. This indication of the time frame refers to the "Prospect"
and to the six parts of the outline. The part called "Beyng" was composed
afterward, not until 1938, so that the time of the composition
of the entire manuscript of Contributions to Philosophy is fixed as the
years 1936-38.
Martin Heidegger entrusted to his brother Fritz the task of preparing
a typewritten transcription of the manuscript. Fritz Heidegger
began his work as soon as the manuscript was finished, and he completed
the transcription in May 1939 at the latest. The page numbers
that run consecutively through the entire handwritten text are indicated
on the top right of the typed sheets. Since one typed sheet often
contains the text of more than a single handwritten page, these numbers
on the top right of the transcription may be two or even three
manuscript page numbers. The numbers that place all the sections in
consecutive order in the manuscript are reproduced in the typescript
on the top left of the first page of the respective section. The sheets of
the transcription are not numbered consecutively throughout. Instead,
parts I through V and part VIn have their own pagination, with
the numbers beginning anew for each part. The page numbers of parts
VI ("The future ones") and vn ("The last god"), however, run consecutively
through both. These numbers on all the typed sheets are
found at the top middle. The roman numerals that precede the titles of
the eight parts do not exist in the manuscript but are indeed found in
the typescript prepared by Fritz Heidegger and in the table of contents
he compiled.
Manuscript page 656a, which Fritz Heidegger characterized as a
"slip of paper," already had its upper half torn off diagonally when he
was producing his typed transcription, with the consequence that a
portion of text prior to the footnoted word "and" on p. 205 has been
lost.
Editor's Afterword 407
A handwritten note Martin Heidegger dated June 3, 1939,
states that the typescript was "cross-checked against the original
text." This proofreading was a joint effort of the two brothers: the
one read his typescript out loud for the other to check against his
manuscript.
*
To produce a copy ready for press, I again checked the typewritten
transcription against the 933 manuscript pages, word for word. I
thereby witnessed once more the great care Fritz Heidegger always
exercised in transcribing his brother's handwriting. I had to restore
and correct the very few omissions and misreadings which are natural
in such transcriptions and which were not even noticed when
Martin Heidegger himself checked the typescript against the manuscript.
Likewise, I corrected fourteen obvious typographical errors
but for the most part let stand peculiarities of spelling. I did not alter
at all the variable spelling of "beyng" and "being," even where what
is at issue is "beyng" and not "being" and where Heidegger, presumably
while doing the actual writing, was now and again inconsistent
in maintaining the distinctive spellings. Heidegger employed numerous
abbreviations in referring to his own writings and manuscripts,
and he especially employed them for the basic words of his thinking.
These abbreviations were largely retained by Fritz Heidegger in his
transcription but had to be filled out for publication. The transcription
also contains some minor handwritten annotations by Martin
Heidegger, and these were incorporated into the published text.
The transcription leaves unaltered the often-deficient punctuation
of the manuscript. Accordingly, I revised and completed all the punctuation
as Heidegger directed should be done for publication. Fritz
Heidegger rendered the underlinings of the manuscript mostly by
spacing out the letters of the emphasized word, but occasionally also
by underlining. The latter occurred presumably as a subsequent correction
to an already typewritten page in which the emphasis had
been overlooked. Since Martin Heidegger stipulated that italics were to
be the only way of indicating stress in the volumes of the Gesamtausgabe,
all interspacings and underlinings in the typescript were uniformly
changed to italics. The articulation of each section by paragraphs
is published just as it occurs in the manuscript.
The numbers which count the sections and order them consecutively
and which, in the manuscript, as already described, are found
on the bottom left of the first page of every section, have been printed
in each case just before the section title. Fritz Heidegger placed these
numbers on the top left of the pages of his transcription and set them
408 Editor's Afterword
before the section title only in the table of contents. Many of the sections,
however, have titles that are worded exactly alike, although
they are independent sections; to clearly differentiate these sections
and thereby avoid confusion, the consecutive numbers have been
attached to the titles themselves.
All footnotes [except those few marked "-Ed." or "-Trans."]
contain cross-references Heidegger placed in the manuscript himself.
They refer either to sections within Contributions to Philosophy or to
other of his own writings, published and unpublished. In the manuscript,
these references are assigned to a section title or else occur in
the body of the text. For publication, I wrote out in full all the abbreviations
in the references, which Fritz Heidegger had left unchanged.
In the references, I also completed the titles of the parts by
inserting articles, wrote out in full the titles of the sections, and
added the section numbers. But I did not add those numbers when
more than one section within a single part bears the same title and
it could not be determined with certainty which specific section Heidegger
was referring to. Insofar as Heidegger refers to other of his
manuscripts which have by now appeared in the Gesamtausgabe, or
have at least been definitely assigned their own volumes in the series,
I inserted the volume number in parentheses.
A few footnotes [marked "-Ed."] contain my expanded bibliographic
data relative to Heidegger's citations of other authors.
Heidegger alludes repeatedly to two of his Freiburg lectures3 and
intends them in their earlier, still unpublished versions (later versions
of each have now already been published). The 1930 Freiburg lecture
"Vom Wesen der Wahrheit" is the first version of a text which was
subsequently revised many times. The final revised version was first
published in 1943 as a separate book under the same title as the originallecture.
Since 1967, this version has also been collected in Wegmarken
(GA9). The 1935 Freiburg lecture, "Vom Ursprung des Kunstwerkes,"
was the original version of the three Frankfurt lectures of
1936 titled "Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes" which were published in
1950 in Holzwege (GAS). Both of these Freiburg lectures, in their previously
unpublished versions, will appear in the volume Vortri:i.ge of division
III of the Gesamtausgabe. This volume will collect all the lectures
that remained unpublished during Heidegger's lifetime.
With regard to the other manuscripts mentioned in Contributions to
Philosophy, the following will appear in division III of the Gesamtausgabe:
3. The bibliography following the glossaries provides full references for these
lectures and for the manuscripts mentioned in the next paragraph as well as for
all other texts of Heidegger cited by him in this book.-Trans.
Editor's Afterword 409
'AM9£la: Die in den ersten Anfang, as well as Entmachtung der
qrame; (1937) and Besinnung (1938-39), and the following will be published
in division IV: notes for the Obung of the summer semester 1937,
Nietzsches metaphysische Grundstellung: Sein und Schein, notes for the
Obung of the winter semester 1937-38, Die metaphysischen Grundstellungen
des abandlandischen Denkens (Metaphysik), as well as notes for the workshop
for docents in the departments of natural science and medicine,
Die neuzeitliche Wissenschaft (1937). Other manuscripts that will be publishedin
division IV are: Laufende Anmerkungen zu "Sein und Zeit" (1936),
Anmerkungen zu "Vom Wesen des Grundes" (1936), Eine Auseinandersetzung
mit "Sein und Zeit" (1936), and Oberlegungen (the volumes of which are
indicated by roman numerals). The "author's own copy" of the essay
Vom Wesen des Grundes refers to Heidegger's copy of the first edition of
1929 containing annotated slips and extensive marginalia. The latter
have already been published in Wegmarken (GA9) in the footnotes that
are marked with lowercase letters.
*
I have waited until the end to acknowledge many debts of gratitude.
Thanks are due in the first place to Hermann Heidegger, appointed by
will the executor of [his father's] literary remains for his decision to
allow, on the occasion of the lOOth anniversary of the birth of the philosopher,
publication of the manuscript of Contributions to Philosophy (Of
the Event), a manuscript which Martin Heidegger kept guarded for decades
and whose publication has been eagerly awaited in philosophical
circles.
The timely appearance of this volume at the beginning of the anniversary
year would nevertheless have been impossible without the
sympathetic cooperation of a number of individuals and institutions.
To carry out the editorial work, I needed a one-semester release from
my duties as a university teacher. I therefore render due thanks to
the philosophy department and rector's office of the Albert-LudwigsUniversitat
Freiburg, as well as to the ministry for science and art
Baden-Wiirttemberg for preferential granting of a research semester.
For generously approving and supporting my petition, I express sincere
gratitude to the minister for science and art of the Baden -Wiirttemberg
region, Helmut Engler, to the rectors of Freiburg University, Volker
Schupp and Christoph Riichardt, to the chancellor of the university,
Friedrich Wilhelm Siburg, as well as to my colleagues, Gerold Prauss
and Klaus Jacobi.
Silvio Vietta, the current owner of the manuscript, very kindly
made it available to be photocopied, for which lowe him many thanks.
410 Editor's Afterword
Bernhard Zeller, now retired but for many years the director of
the Deutsches Literaturachiv Marbach, and his successor, Ulrich Ott,
are due special thanks for creating excellent working conditions for
the previous, and continuing, editorial preparation of the volumes of
the Gesamtausgabe. All editors of these volumes are greatly obliged to
the staff members of the Deutsches Literaturachiv Marbach, who,
from the beginning of the project of the Gesamtausgabe, have made
available with great willingness and accommodation the materials
needed to edit the individual volumes-including the present oneand
who have thereby decisively promoted the steady growth of the
series. Let me here name Joachim W. Storck, Ute Doster, Inge Schimmer,
Winfried FeifeL Ingrid Grtininger, Ursula Fahrlander, Elfriede
Ihle, and Beate Ktisters.
Hartmut Tietjen, with his vast experience in reading and transcribing
Heidegger's penmanship, helped me decipher some difficult
passages, and for that I offer him cordial thanks. I offer the same to
Hans-Helmuth Gander for his meticulous final examination of the
copy sent to the printer. I also express my sincere gratitude to him
and to Franz-Karl Blust for the scrupulous attention with which they
played their part in the work of proofreading.
F. -W. v. Herrmann
Freiburg i. Br.
February, 1988
GERMAN-ENGLISH GLOSSARY
der Abgrund
der Ab-grund
das Ab-griindige
die Ahnung
der Andrang
der Anfall
der Anfang
anfanglich
die Anfiinglichkeit
der Anklang
die Ankunft
der Ansatz
ansatzgemaB
die Anwesenheit
die Anwesung
aufleuchten
der AufriB
die Augenblicksstatte
der Ausbleib
die Auseinandersetzung
die Ausfalligkeit
die Aussage
das Aussehen
ausstehen
das Bediirfen
befremdlich
die Begriindung
die Bergung
die Beriickung
die Besinnung
das Bestandnis
abyss
abyssal ground
what is a-byssal
presentiment
pressing forth
sudden occurrence
beginning
inceptual
incipience
resonating
advent
postulation
incipiently
presence
presencing
light up
outline; tearing open
site of the moment
remaining absent
confrontation
splitting open
assertion
look
withstand
needfulness
alienating
exposition of the ground
sheltering
captivation
meditation
enduring
408 Editor's Afterword
before the section title only in the table of contents. Many of the sections,
however, have titles that are worded exactly alike, although
they are independent sections; to clearly differentiate these sections
and thereby avoid confusion, the consecutive numbers have been
attached to the titles themselves.
All footnotes [except those few marked "-Ed." or "-Trans."]
contain cross-references Heidegger placed in the manuscript himself.
They refer either to sections within Contributions to Philosophy or to
other of his own writings, published and unpublished. In the manuscript,
these references are assigned to a section title or else occur in
the body of the text. For publication, I wrote out in full all the abbreviations
in the references, which Fritz Heidegger had left unchanged.
In the references, I also completed the titles of the parts by
inserting articles, wrote out in full the titles of the sections, and
added the section numbers. But I did not add those numbers when
more than one section within a single part bears the same title and
it could not be determined with certainty which specific section Heidegger
was referring to. Insofar as Heidegger refers to other of his
manuscripts which have by now appeared in the Gesamtausgabe, or
have at least been definitely assigned their own volumes in the series,
I inserted the volume number in parentheses.
A few footnotes [marked "-Ed."] contain my expanded bibliographic
data relative to Heidegger's citations of other authors.
Heidegger alludes repeatedly to two of his Freiburg lectures3 and
intends them in their earlier, still unpublished versions (later versions
of each have now already been published). The 1930 Freiburg lecture
"Vom Wesen der Wahrheit" is the first version of a text which was
subsequently revised many times. The final revised version was first
published in 1943 as a separate book under the same title as the originallecture.
Since 1967, this version has also been collected in Wegmarken
(GA9). The 1935 Freiburg lecture, "Vom Ursprung des Kunstwerkes,"
was the original version of the three Frankfurt lectures of
1936 titled "Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes" which were published in
1950 in Holzwege (GA5). Both of these Freiburg lectures, in their previously
unpublished versions, will appear in the volume Vortriige of division
III of the Gesamtausgabe. This volume will collect all the lectures
that remained unpublished during Heidegger's lifetime.
With regard to the other manuscripts mentioned in Contributions to
Philosophy, the following will appear in division III of the Gesamtausgabe:
3. The bibliography following the glossaries provides full references for these
lectures and for the manuscripts mentioned in the next paragraph as well as for
all other texts of Heidegger cited by him in this book.-Trans.
Editor's Afterword 409
'AA~eEla: Die in den ersten Anfang, as well as der
CPU(HC; (1937) and Besinnung (1938-39), and the following will be published
in division IV: notes for the Obung of the summer semester 1937,
Nietzsches metaphysische Grundstellung: Sein und Schein, notes for the
Obung of the winter semester 1937-38, Die metaphysischen Grundstellungen
des abandlandischen Denkens (Metaphysik), as well as notes for the workshop
for docents in the departments of natural science and medicine,
Die neuzeitliche Wissenschaft (1937). Other manuscripts that will be published
in division IV are: LaufendeAnmerkungenzu "Sein und Zeit" (1936),
Anmerkungen zu "Vom Wesen des Grundes" (1936), Bine Auseinandersetzung
mit "Sein und Zeit" (1936), and Oberlegungen (the volumes of which are
indicated by roman numerals). The "author's own copy" of the essay
Vom Wesen des Grundes refers to Heidegger's copy of the first edition of
1929 containing annotated slips and extensive marginalia. The latter
have already been published in Wegmarken (GA9) in the footnotes that
are marked with lowercase letters.
*
I have waited until the end to acknowledge many debts of gratitude.
Thanks are due in the first place to Hermann Heidegger, appointed by
will the executor of [his father's] literary remains for his decision to
allow, on the occasion of the lOOth anniversary of the birth of the philosopher,
publication of the manuscript of Contributions to Philosophy (Of
the Event), a manuscript which Martin Heidegger kept guarded for decades
and whose publication has been eagerly awaited in philosophical
circles. .
The timely appearance of this volume at the beginning of the anniversary
year would nevertheless have been impossible without the
sympathetic cooperation of a number of individuals and institutions.
To carry out the editorial work, I needed a one-semester release from
my duties as a university teacher. I therefore render due thanks to
the philosophy department and rector's office of the Albert-LudwigsUniversiUit
Freiburg, as well as to the ministry for science and art
Baden-Wiirttemberg for preferential granting of a research semester.
For generously approving and supporting my petition, I express sincere
gratitude to the minister for science and art of the Baden -Wiirttemberg
region, Helmut Engler, to the rectors of Freiburg University, Volker
Schupp and Christoph Riichardt, to the chancellor of the university,
Friedrich Wilhelm Siburg, as well as to my colleagues, Gerold Prauss
and Klaus Jacobi.
Silvio Vietta, the current owner of the manuscript, very kindly
made it available to be photocopied, for which lowe him many thanks.
412 German-English Glossary
das Bestehen
die Bestreitung des Streites
das Da
das Da-sein
durchragen
das Eigentum
die Eignung
die Einbildung
der Einfall
einfiigen
einmalig
die Einraumung
die Einrichtung
die EntauBerung
ent-eignet
die Ent-gegnung
die Entriickung
das Entscheidungswesen
ent-setzen
der Entwurf
der Ent-zug
das Er-ahnen
das Er-denken
das Ereignis
das Er-eignis
die Er-eignung
erfiigen
die Ergriindung
die Er-griindung
die Erkenntnis
die Erkliiftung
das Erlebnis
das Erschrecken
erschweigend
die Erschwingung
erspringen
erstreiten
die Erwesung
die Erwinkung
die Erzitterung
persistence
playing out of the strife
the «there)}
Da-sein (lit., «being-there)})
protrude through
domain of what is proper
appropriation
imagination
incursion
insert
non -repeatable
granting of place
arrangement; institution;
instituting
surrendering
dis appropriated
en-counter
transporting
decisional essence
un-settle
projection
with-drawal
foreboding
inventive thinking
event
appropriating event
appropriating eventuation;
ap-propriation
dispense
fathoming
creative grounding
cognition
sundering
lived experience
shock
silence bearing
coming to be of the oscillation
reach in a leap
reach through the strife
originating essential
occurrence
beckoning intimation
trembling
German-English Glossary
die Flucht
das Freie
die Fuge
die Fugen
sich fiigend
die Fiigung
Fiigungen
das Gefiige
die Gefiigung
der Gegenschwung
die Geschichte
gewesend
der Grimm
der Grund
die Grundfrage
die Grundstimmung
die Griindung
hereinragen
der Hereinstand
die Herrschaft
die Historie
das hochste Seiende
das Inmitten
die Instandigkeit
die Kehre
kehrig
die Kluft
die Leitfrage
der letzte Gott
die lichtende Verbergung
die Lichtung
die Machenschaft
die Negation
negativ
die Negativitat
nichten
nichthaft
das Nichthafte
die Nichthaftigkeit
das Nichtige
das Nichtige schlechthin
das nm Nichtige
ein Nichtiges
absconding
free domain
conjuncture
junctures
compliant
joining; dispensation
junctures
structure
availability
oscillation
history
not yet past
wrath
ground
basic question
basic disposition
grounding
protrude
the standing into
sovereignty; reigning
historiology
the highest being
the in-the-midst
steadfastness
the turning
turning
fissure
guiding question
the last god
the clearing concealment
the clearing
machination
negation
negative; negating
negativity
occur as negating
permeated with negativity
the negative
negativity
the negative
sheer nullity
sheer nullity
a nullity
413
414 German-English Glossary
die Nichtigkeit
die bloge Nichtigkeit
das Nichtigste
das Nichts
das Nichtsein
das Nichtseyn
die Nichtung
die Not
die Notlosigkeit
die Notschaft
das oberste Seiende
das Offene
die Offenheit
die Raumung
das Riesenhafte
rticken
die Sage
das Sagen
der Satz
die Scheu
der Schrecken
das Schweigen
das Sein
seiend
das Seiende
seiender
ein Seiendes
die Seiendheit
das Seiendste
die Seinsfrage
die Seinsvergessenheit
die Seinsverlassenheit
die Seinsverlassenheit des Seienden
die Seinsgeschichte
die Selbstaufgabe
das Seyn
das seynsgeschichtliche Denken
das Sichverbergen
die Sigetik
der Spielraum
negativity
utter nullity
the most negative
nothingness
nonbeing
nonbeyng
occurrence of negativity
plight; need
lack of a sense of plight
indigence
the supreme being
open realm
openness
spatialization
the gigantic
transpose
saying
saying; utterance
proposition
diffidence
shock
silence
being
what is
beings
is more fully; is more
eminently
a being
beingness
what is most eminently
the question of being
forgottenness of being
abandonment by being
abandonment of beings by
being
history of being
self -renunciation
beyng
the thinking of beyng in its
historicality
self -concealment
sigetics
playing field
der Sprung
standig
die Statte
der Streit
strittig
die Temporalitat
tibereignen
die Dber-eignung
der Dbergang
das DbermaE
die Dberwindung
der Umschlag
die Umweigerung
der Ungrund
das Unseiende
unseiender
der Untergang
die Unterscheidung
der Unterschied
das Unwesen
der Urgrund
verbergen
verbtirgen
die Verftigung
die Verhaltenheit
verleugen
verneinend
die Verneinung
verrticken
die Versagung
die Verschweigung
die Versetztheit
die Verstellung
die Verweigerung
die Vor-frage
vorhanden
das Vorleuchten
vor-ragend
die Vorstellung
der Wachter
derWeg
das Weg
das Weg-sein
German-English Glossary
leap
constant
site
strife
conflictual
primordial temporality
consign
consigning appropriation
transition
excess
the overcoming
overturning
encompassing refusal
distorted ground
nonbeings
is less fully
downgoing
differentiation
difference
distorted essence
primordial ground
conceal
secure
disposal; availability
restraint
negate
negating
negation
dislodge
withholding
reticence
transposedness
disguise
refusal
precursory question
objectively present
pre-gleaming
salient
representation
steward
the way
the away
being-away
415
416
das Wegbleiben
die Weigerung
die Wendungsmitte
das Wesen
die Wesung
die Wiederbringung
derWink
das Wissen
der Zeit-Raum
der Zeit-Spiel-Raum
die Zeitlichkeit
die Zerkliiftung
zueignen
die Zu-eignung
die Zuktinftigen
das Zuspiel
die Zuweisung
German-English Glossary
staying away
withholding
axis
essence
essential occurrence
retrieval
intimation
knowledge
time-space
temporal-spatial playing field
temporality
fissure
assign; acquire
assigning appropriation
the future ones
interplay; playing over to
allocation
ENGLISH-GERMAN GLOSSARY
abandonment by being
abandonment of beings by being
absconding
abyss
abyssal ground
advent
alienating
allocation
appropriation
ap-propriation
appropriating event
appropriating eventuation
assertion
assign
assigning appropriation
availability
axis
basic disposition
basic question
beckoning intimation
beginning
a being
being
being-away
beingness
beings
beyng
captivation
the clearing
the clearing concealment
die Seinsverlassenheit
die Seinsverlassenheit des
Seienden
die Flucht
der Abgrund
der Ab-grund
die Ankunft
befremdlich
die Zuweisung
die Eignung
die Er-eignung
das Er-eignis
die Er-eignung
die Aussage
zueignen
die Zu-eignung
die Verfiigung
die Wendungsmitte
die Grundstimmung
die Grundfrage
die Erwinkung
der Anfang
ein Seiendes
das Sein
das Weg-sein
die Seiendheit
das Seiende
das Seyn
die Beriickung
die Lichtung
die lichtende Verbergung
418 English-German Glossary
cognition
coming to be of the oscillation
compliant
conceal
conflictual
confrontation
conjuncture
consign
consigning appropriation
constant
creative grounding
decisional essence
difference
differentiation
diffidence
disappropriated
disguise
dislodge
disposal
distorted essence; distortion
distorted ground
domain of what is proper
downgoing
encompassing refusal
en-counter
enduring
essence
essential occurrence
event
excess
exposition of the ground
fathoming
fissure
forgottenness of being
future ones
the gigantic
granting of place
guiding question
the highest being
historiology
history
history of being
imagination
die Erkenntnis
die Erschwingung
sich ftigend
verbergen
strittig
die Auseinandersetzung
die Fuge
iibereignen
die Uber-eignung
standig
die Er-grtindung
das Entscheidungswesen
der Unterschied
die Unterscheidung
die Scheu
ent-eignet
die Verstellung
verrticken
die Verftigung
das Unwesen
der Ungrund
das Eigentum
der Untergang
die Umweigerung
die Ent-gegnung
das Bestandnis
das Wesen
die Wesung
das Ereignis
das UbermaB
die Begrtindung
die Ergrtindung
die Zerkltiftung
die Seinsvergessenheit
die Zuktinftigen
das Riesenhafte
die Einraumung
die Leitfrage
das hochste Seiende
die Historie
die Geschichte
die Seinsgeschichte
die Einbildung
English-German Glossary 419
inceptuaJ
incipience
incipiently
incorporate
incursion
indigence
instituting; institution
interplay
in-the-midst
intimation
inventive thinking
is less fully
is more fully
joining
junctures
knowledge
lack of a sense of plight
leap
light up
lived experience
look
machination
meditation
need
needfulness
negation
negativity
nonbeing
nonbeings
nonbeyng
non -repeatable
not yet past
nothingness
objectively present
open realm
openness
originary
originating essential occurrence
oscillation
outline
overturning
persistence
anfanglich
die Anfanglichkeit
ansatzgemalS
einfiigen
der Einfall
die Notschaft
die Einrichtung
das Zuspiel
das Inmitten
der Wink
das Er-denken
unseiender
seiender
die Fiigung
Fiigungen; Fugen
das Wissen
die N otlosigkeit
der Sprung
aufleuchten
das Erlebnis
das Aussehen
die Machenschaft
die Besinnung
die Not
das Bediirfen
die Verneinung; die Negation
die Nichthaftigkeit; die Nichtigkeit;
die Negativitat
das Nichtsein
das Unseiende
das Nichtseyn
einmalig
gewesend
das Nichts
vorhanden
das Offene
die Offenheit
urspriinglich
die Erwesung
der Gegenschwung
der AufrilS
der Umschlag
das Bestehen
420 English-German Glossary
playing field
playing out of the strife
plight
postulation
precursory question
pre-gleaming
presence
presencing
presentiment
pressing forth
primordial temporality
projection
proposition
protrude
protrude through
the question of being
reach in a leap
reach through the strife
refusal
remaining absent
representation
resonating
restraint
reticence
retrieval
salient
saying
secure
self-concealment
self-renunciation
sheltering
shock
sigetics
silence
silence bearing
site
site of the moment
sovereignty
spatialization
splitting open
staying away
der Spielraum
die Bestreitung des Streites
die Not
der Ansatz
die Vor-frage
das Vorleuchten
die Anwesenheit
die Anwesung
die Ahnung
der Andrang
die Temporalitat; vs. temporality:
die Zeitlichkeit
der Entwurf
der Satz
hereinragen
durchragen
die Seinsfrage
erspringen
erstreiten
die Verweigerung
der Ausbleib
die Vorstellung
der Anklang
die Verhaltenheit
die Verschweigung
die Wiederbringung
vor-ragend
die Sage; das Sagen
verbiirgen
das Sichverbergen
die Selbstaufgabe
die Bergung
das Erschrecken; der
Schrecken
die Sigetik
das Schweigen
erschweigend
die Statte
die Augenblicksstatte
die Herrschaft
die Raumung
die Ausfalligkeit
das Wegbleiben
English-German Glossary 421
steadfastness
steward
strife
structure
the supreme being
surrendering
temporal-spatial playing field
temporality
the thinking of beyng in its
historicality
time-space
transition
transporting
transpose
trembling
the turning
turning
un-settle
what is
what is a-byssal
what is most eminently
withholding
withstand
wrath
die Instandigkeit
der Wachter
der Streit
das Gefiige
das oberste Seiende
die EntauBerung
der Zeit-Spiel-Raum
die Zeitlichkeit; vs. primordial
temporality: die Temporalitat
das seynsgeschichtliche
Denken
der Zeit-Raum
der trbergang
die Entriickung
riicken
die Erzitterung
die Kehre
kehrig
ent-setzen
seiend
das Ab-griindige
das Seiendste
die Versagung
ausstehen
der Grimm

GREEK-ENGLISH GLOSSARY
ayaeov
aywv
aOtKia
ad , ,
arna
aA~eEta
aA~eEta Kat OV
aAfJeEUEtv
aAfJeEUEtv Tile, l/Juxile,
aAfJeWe,
avallvfJO'te,
avLtKdllEVOV
avun:OeETOV
an:ouO'ia
an:o<pavO'te,
apx~
apx~ ~wile,
apx~ TOU ovroe,
yevfJ
yevoe,
°fJAOUllEVOV
°fJlltoUpyoe,
OtaA£YEO'eat
OtaVOElv
OtavoE10'eat
OiKfJ
86~a
ouvallte,
e:iooe,
e:ivat
eKaO'TOV, -a
good; useful
contest
injustice
eternal
cause
unconcealedness; truth
truth and being
disclose
the unconcealing of the soul
truly
recollection
the opposed
what is not hypothetical
absence
assertion
origin
origin of life
origin of beings
plural of yevoe" q.v.
lineage; genus
the manifest
craftsman
discuss
to think through
to think through
justice
glory; opinion
possibility
look
being
the particular(s)
424
£llITEtpia
EV
£V£PYEta
£VTEA£XEta
£VTEA£XEta ~ ITPWTll
Mv
£IT£KEtva T~<; oucria<;
£rrtcrT~lll1
epw<;
ecrnv yap dvat.
EUOatllOVta
~uyov
~w~
~4>OV
~4>ov A6yov exov
9Elov
9EO<;
9£crEt QV
iO£a
iOElv
icrTopElv
Ka90AOU
Ka9'aUTO
Kat
KaA6v
KaTllYOPE1V
KaTllyoptat
KtVllcrt<;
KtvOUllEVOV
KA£O<;
KOlVOV ,
KOtvWvta
KocrllO<;
A£YEtv
A6yo<;
1l£YE9o<;
llEra~OA~
ll~ QV
llOP<P~
VOE1V
VOOUllEVOV
VOV<;
Greek-English Glossary
experience
one
actuality
consummation
first consummation
beings
beyond beingness
secure knowledge
love
For being is.
happiness
yoke
life
living being
the animal possessing
discourse
divine
god
posited beings
look
see
investigate
universal
for itself
and
beautiful
to predicate
categories
motion
moving thing
repute
common
community
order; world
gathering representation
gatheredness; discourse
extension
change
nonbeing
form
think; apprehend
the thing thought of
thinking; apprehension
VUV
OAOV
Olloiwat<;
OV
Bv nOV
ovrw<; ov
on eanv
ouaia
rrexv
rrapouaia
rrepa<;
rr£ptexov
rrv£ulla
rroil']at<;
rrotov
rrolOUll£VOV
rroA£llo<;
rroaov
rrore
rrou
rrpor£pov
rrpor£pov rn cpua£!
atyexv
aUllrrAoK~
auvoAov
axoA~
aWlla
reAo<;
rexvl']
ri Eanv
ri ro ov;
roS£n
rorro<;
VAl']
urr09£at<;
UrrOKelll£VOV
UrrOAl']\jn<;
cpopa
cpua£t
cpuat<;
cpw<;
Xao<;
Greek-English Glossary
now
whole
adequation; correctness
that which is; beings
beings as beings
425
the highest being; lit., the beingly
being
that it is; existence
beingness
all
presence
limit
that which encloses
spirit
making
quality
thing produced
strife
quantity
when
where
first
first by nature
to be silent
connection
junction
leisure
body
end
know-how; technology
what it is; essence
What are beings?
this-what; the particular
place
matter
what is laid down underneath
what lies underneath
deeming
motion with respect to place
by nature
the self-emergent; nature
light
chasm
426 Greek-English Glossary
xpovo<;
XWPWl1o<;
¢ux~
~ ¢UX~ TO: Dvm rrw<; £ClTlv.
time
separation
soul
The soul is in a way (all) the
things.
LATIN-ENGLISH GLOSSARY
actus
adaequatio
aeternum
analogia entis
anima
animal rationale
animus
apperceptio
appetitus
argumentum ex re
argumentum ex verbo
causa
causa prima
causa sui
causatum ab ente infinito
certitudo
certum
certum esse
clara et distinct a perceptio
cogitare
cogitatio
cog ito me cogitare
componere scripta de aliqua re
connexio
creatio
creatum creatoris
Deus
Deus creator
act
adequation
eternal
analogy of being
soul
rational animal
spirit
apperception
appetite
argument based on observing
the thing itself
argument based on other
arguments
cause
first cause
cause of itself
caused by an infinite being
certainty
certain
to be certain
clear and distinct perception
to think
a thought
I think of myself thinking
to compile what has been written
on some topic
connection
creation
the creation of the creator
God
God the creator
428
doctrina
ecce homo
ego
ego cogito sum
ego cogito-ergo sum
ego percipio
ens
ens actu
ens certum
ens creatum
ens entium
ens finitum
ens in commune
ens qua ens
entitas entis
esse
essentia
ex-sistere
experientia
experimentum
experiri
fides
filius legitimus
forma
harmonia mundi
homo animal rationale
identitas
imaginatio
intellectus
intellectus divinus
intuitus
lumen
lumen naturale
materia
monas
negativum
omne ens
ordo
perceptio
perceptum
positum
possibilitas
Latin-English Glossary
learning
Behold the man.
1
I am thinking, I am.
I am thinking-therefore I am.
I myself am perceiving.
a being
a being in actuality
certain being
created being
the being of all beings; the
highest being
finite being
being in common
beings as beings
the being of the being
to be; being
essence
to stand out; exist
experience
test; experiment
to know by trial
faith
legitimate son
form
harmony of the world
man the rational animal
identity
imagination
intellect
divine intellect
intuition
light
natural light
matter
monad
negative
all beings
order
perception
the perceived
posited
possibility
qua principium
quale
quantitas
quantum
ratio
realitas
rectitudo
res
saeculum
scientia
scio
sensorium Dei
sermo
sermones et scripta
specialia
spiritus
subjectum
substantia
summum ens
universitas
universum
verbum divinum
veritas
veritas iudicii
verum
verum esse
Latin-English
as a principle
quality
quantity
magnitude
reason
reality
correctness; conformity
thing; matter at issue
age
knowledge
I know
God's sensorium
something said
things said and written
specialties
spirit
subject
substance
the highest being
university
universal
divine word
truth
truth of judgment
true
to be true
429

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Other texts of Heidegger cited by him in this book
'AA~e£la: Die Erinnerung in den ersten Anfang. ['AA~e£la: Retrospection into the
First Beginning.] As yet unpublished.
Der Anfang der abendliindischen Philosophie (Anaximander und Parmenides). [The
Beginning of Western philosophy (Anaximander and Parmenides).] Frankfurt:
Klostermann, 20lO (GA35).
Eine Auseinandersetzung mit Sein und Zeit. [A Confrontation with Being and Time.]
As yet unpublished.
Die Auslegungen der Aristotelischen "Physik." [The Interpretations of Aristotle's
Physics.] As yet unpublished.
Die Begrlindung des neuzeitlichen Weltbildes durch die Metaphysik. [Exposing
the foundation of the modern image of the world in metaphysics.] In Holzwege
under the title: Die Zeit des Weltbildes. Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1997
(GA5). Translated by William Lovitt as "The Age of the world picture." In The
Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays. New York: Harper, 1977.
Besinnung. Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1997 (GA66). Translated by Parvis
Emad and Thomas Kalary as Mindfulness. London: Athlone, 2006. (In the
present text, die Besinnung is translated as "meditation.")
Einfiihrung in die Metaphysik. Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1983 (GA40). Translated
by Gregory Fried and Richard Polt as Introduction to Metaphysics. New
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2000.
Die Frage nach dem Ding: Zu Kants Lehre von den transzendentalen Grundsiitzen.
[The Question of the thing: On Kant's Doctrine of the Transcendental Principles.]
Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1984 (GA41). Translated by W. Barton and
Vera Deutsch as What is a Thing? Chicago: Regnery, 1967.
Die Grundbegriffe der Metaphysik: Welt- Endlichkeit-Einsamkeit. Frankfurt: Klostermann,
1983 (GA29-30). Translated by William McNeill and Nicholas
Walker as The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics: World, Finitude, Solitude.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1995.
Grundfragen der Philosophie: Ausgewiihlte "Probleme" der "Logik." Frankfurt:
Klostermann, 1984 (GA45). Translated by Richard Rojcewicz and Andre
Schuwer as Basic Questions of Philosophy: Selected "Problems" of "Logic." Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1994.
432
Die der Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1975 (GA24).
Translated by Albert Hofstadter as Basic Problems of Phenomenology. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1982.
Hegels Phiinomenologie des Geistes. Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1980 (GA32).
Translated by Parvis Emad and Kenneth Maly as Hegel's Phenomenology of
Spirit. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988.
HOlderlins Hymne "Andenken." [Holderlin's Hymn "Remembrance."] Frankfurt:
Klostermann, 1982 (GA52).
Holderlins Hymne "Der Ister." Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1984 (GA53). Translated
by William McNeill and Julia Davis as Holderlin's Hymn "The Ister."
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1996.
Holderlins Hymnen "Germanien" und "Der Rhein." [Holderlin's Hymns "Germania"
und "The Rhine."] Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1980 (GA39).
Holzwege. Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1977 (GA5). Translated by Julian Young
and Kenneth Haynes as Off the beaten track. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2002. See Die Begriindung des neuzeitlichen Weltbildes
durch die Metaphysik and Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes.
Kant und das Problem der Metaphysik. Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1991 (GA3).
Translated by Richard Taft as Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1990. (Referred to by Heidegger as "the Kant
book.")
Laufende Anmerkungen zu "Sein und Zeit." [Running Commentary on "Being and
Time. "] As yet unpublished.
Die metaphysis chen Grundstellungen des abendliindischen Denkens
(Metaphysik). ["The Basic Metaphysical Positions of Western Thinking
(Metaphysics)."] In Seminare. Frankfurt: Klostermann, 2008 (GA88).
Nietzsche: Der Wille zur Macht als Kunst. Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1985 (GA43).
Translated by David F. Krell (from the Neske edition of 1961) as Nietzsche:
The Will to Power as Art. San Francisco: Harper, 1979.
Nietzsches metaphysische Grundstellung im abendliindischen Denken: Die ewige
Wiederkehr des Gleichen. [Nietzsche's Basic Metaphysical Position in Western
Thought: The Eternal Recurrence of the Same.] Frankfurt: Klostermann,
1986 (GA44). Translated by David F. Krell (from the Neske edition of
1961: Nietzsche: Die ewige Wiederkehr des Gleichen) as Nietzsche: The Eternal
Recurrence of the Same. San Francisco: Harper, 1984.
Nietzsches metaphysische Grundstellung: Sein und Schein. ["Nietzsche's
Basic Metaphysical Position: Being and Appearance."] In Nietzsche: Seminare
1937 und 1944. Frankfurt: Klostermann, 2004 (GA87).
Schelling: Uber das Wesen der menschlichen Freiheit. Frankfurt: Klostermann,
1988 (GA42). Translated by Joan Stambaugh as Schelling's Treatise on the
Essence of Human Freedom. Athens: Ohio University Press, 1984.
Sein und Zeit. Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1977 (GA2). Translated by John
Macquarrie and Edward Robinson as Being and Time. New York: Harper &
Row, 1962, and translated by Joan Stambaugh (revision by Dennis J.
Schmidt) as Being and Time. Albany, N.Y.: SUNY Press, 2010.
Die Selbstbehauptung der deutschen Universitiit. In Reden und andere Zeugnisse
eines Lebensweges. Frankfurt: Klostermann, 2000 (GA16). Translated
Bibliography 433
by Karsten Harries as "The Self-Assertion of the German University,"
Review of Metaphysics 38 (March, 1985).
Uber Logik als Frage nach der Sprache. [On logic as the Question of Language.] Published
as Logik als die Frage nach dem Wesen der Sprache. Frankfurt: Klostermann,
1998 (GA38). Translated by Wanda Gregory and Yvonne Unna
as Logic as the Question Concerning the Essence of Language. Albany, N.Y.:
SUNY Press, 2009.
Uberlegungen. [Deliberations.] As yet unpublished.
Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes. In Holzwege. Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1997
(GAS). Translated by Albert Hofstadter as "The origin of the work of art."
In Poetry, language, thought. New York: Harper, 1971.
Vom Ursprung des Kunstwerkes. ["On the origin of the work of art."] Original
version of Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes, q.v.
Vom Wesen des Grundes. In Wegmarken. Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1976
(GA9). Translated by William McNeill as "On the essence of ground." In
Pathmarks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Vom Wesen der Wahrheit. Lecture 1930. In Wegmarken. Frankfurt: Klostermann,
1976 (GA9). Translated by John Sallis as "On the essence of
truth." In Pathmarks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Vom Wesen der Wahrheit. Lecture course 1933-34. Part 2 of Sein und Wahrheit.
Frankfurt: Klostermann, 2001 (GA36-37).
Vom Wesen der Wahrheit: Zu Platons Hiihlengleichnis und Theatet. Frankfurt: Klostermann,
1988 (GA34). Translated by Ted Sadler as The Essence of Truth: On
Plato's Cave Allegory and Theaetetus. New York: Continuum, 2002.
Was ist Metaphysik? In Wegmarken. Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1976 (GA9).
Translated by David Farrell Krell as "What is Metaphysics?" In Pathmarks.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Wegmarken. Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1976 (GA9). English translation edited
by William McNeill: Pathmarks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1998.