Hua Hu Jing - Educate the Barbarians Sutra
This classical Daoist text is known as the Taishang lingbao Laozi huahu
miaojing (太上靈寶老子化胡妙經, "The Supreme Numinous Treasure’s
Sublime Classic on Laozi’s Conversion of the Barbarians"). A copy of
the Huahujing was discovered in the Mogao Caves near Dunhuang,
and Liu Yi (1997) believes the original text dates from around the late
4th or early 5th century. Although this sutra is attributed to Lao Zi,
most Daoist scholars do not agree as there was no historical reference
to this text until 4th century CE.
This poetical English translation is done by Brian Walker and according
to him, it was inspired by his Daoist teacher (as he writes here). In my
opinion, although it has much too many words for an original Chinese
sutra, it may serve as a good map for a Qigong practitioner.
化胡經: Hua Hu Jing
1
I reach the Integral Way of uniting with the great and mysterious Tao.
My teachings are simple; if you try to make a religion or science of
them, they will elude you. Profound yet plain, they contain the entire
truth of the universe. Those who wish to know the whole truth take joy
in doing the work and service that comes to them. Having completed
it, they take joy in cleansing and feeding themselves. Having cared for
others and for themselves, they then turn to the master for
instruction. This simple path leads to peace, virtue, and abundance.
2
Men and women who wish to be aware of the whole truth should adopt
the practices of the Integral Way. These time-honored disciplines calm
the mind and bring one into harmony with all things. The first practice
is the practice of undiscriminating virtue: take care of those who are
deserving; also, and equally, take care of those who are not. When
you extend your virtue in all directions without discriminating, your
feet are firmly planted on the path that returns to the Tao.
3
Those who wish to embody the Tao should embrace all things. To
embrace all things means first that one holds no anger or resistance
toward any idea or thing, living or dead, formed or formless.
Acceptance is the very essence of the Tao. To embrace all things
means also that one rids oneself of any concept of separation; male
and female, self and other, life and death. Division is contrary to the
nature of the Tao. Foregoing antagonism and separation, one enters in
the harmonious oneness of all things.
4
Every departure from the Tao contaminates one’s spirit. Anger is a
departure, resistance a departure, self- absorption a departure. Over
many lifetimes the burden of contaminations can become great. There
is only one way to cleanse oneself of these contaminations, and that is
to practice virtue. What is meant by this? To practice virtue is to
selflessly offer assistance to others, giving without limitation one’s
time, abilities, and possessions in service, whenever and wherever
needed, without prejudice concerning the identity of those in need. If
your willingness to give blessings is limited, so also is your ability to
receive them. This is the subtle operation of the Tao.
5
Do you imagine the universe is agitated? Go into the desert at night
and took out at the stars. This practice should answer the question.
The superior person settles her mind as the universe settles the stars
in the sky. By connecting her mind with the subtle origin, she calms it.
Once calmed, it naturally expands, and ultimately her mind becomes
as vast and immeasurable as the night sky.
6
The Tao gives rise to all forms, yet it has no form of its own. If you
attempt to fix a picture of it in your mind, you will lose it. This is like
pinning a butterfly: the husk is captured, but the flying is lost. Why
not be content with simply experiencing it?
7
The teaching of the Integral Way will go on as long as there is a Tao
and someone who wishes to embody it; What is painted in these
scrolls today will appear in different forms in many generations to
come. These things, however, will never change: Those who wish to
attain oneness must practice undiscriminating virtue. They must
dissolve all ideas of duality: good and bad, beautiful and ugly, high
and low. They will be obliged to abandon any mental bias born of
cultural or religious belief. Indeed, they should hold their minds free of
any thought which interferes with their understanding of the universe
as a harmonious oneness. The beginning of these practices is the
beginning of liberation.
8
I confess that there is nothing to teach: no religion, no science, no
body of information which will lead your mind back to the Tao. Today I
speak in this fashion, tomorrow in another, but always the Integral
Way is beyond words and beyond mind. Simply be aware of the
oneness of things.
9
He who desires the admiration of the world will do well to amass a
great fortune and then give it away. The world will respond with
admiration in proportion to the size of his treasure. Of course, this is
meaningless. Stop striving after admiration. Place your esteem on the
Tao. Live in accord with it, share with others the teachings that lead to
it, and you will be immersed in the blessings that flow from it.
10
The ego is a monkey catapulting through the jungle: Totally fascinated
by the realm of the senses, it swings from one desire to the next, one
conflict to the next, one self-centered idea to the next. If you threaten
it, it actually fears for its life. Let this monkey go. Let the senses go.
Let desires go. Let conflicts go. Let ideas go. Let the fiction of life and
death go. Just remain in the center, watching. And then forget that
you are there.
11
Does one scent appeal more than another? Do you prefer this flavor,
or that feeling? Is your practice sacred and your work profane? Then
your mind is separated: from itself, from oneness, from the Tao. Keep
your mind free of divisions and distinctions. When your mind is
detached, simple, quiet, then all things can exist in harmony, and you
can begin to perceive the subtle truth.
12
Do you wish to inhabit sacred space? To have the respect and
companionship of the highest spiritual beings? To be protected by the
guardians of the eight powerful energy rays? Then cherish the Integral
Way: Regard these teachings with reverence, practice their truths,
illuminate them to others. You will receive as many blessings from the
universe as there are grains of sand in the River of Timelessness.
13
The tiny particles which form the vast universe are not tiny at all.
Neither is the vast universe vast. These are notions of the mind, which
is like a knife, always chipping away at the Tao, trying to render it
graspable and manageable. But that which is beyond form is
ungraspable, and that which is beyond knowing is unmanageable.
There is, however, this consolation: She who lets go of the knife will
find the Tao at her fingertips.
14
Can you dissolve your ego? Can you abandon the idea of self and
other? Can you relinquish the notions of male and female, short and
long, life and death? Can you let go of all these dualities and embrace
the Tao without skepticism or panic? If so, you can reach the heart of
the Integral Oneness. Along the way, avoid thinking of the Oneness as
unusual, exalted, sublime, transcendental. Because it is the Oneness,
it is beyond all that. It is simply the direct, essential, and complete
truth.
15
To the ordinary being, others often require tolerance. To the highly
evolved being, there is no such thing as tolerance, because there is no
such thing as other. She has given up all ideas of individuality and
extended her goodwill without prejudice in every direction. Never
hating, never resisting, never contesting, she is simply always learning
and being. Loving, hating, having expectations: all these are
attachments. Attachment prevents the growth of one’s true being.
Therefore the integral being is attached to nothing and can relate to
everyone with an unstructured attitude. Because of this, her very
existence benefits all things. You see, that which has form is equal to
that which is without form, and that which is alive is equal to that
which rests. This is the subtle truth, not a religious invention, but only
those who are already highly evolved will understand this.
16
Most of the world’s religions serve only to strengthen attachments to
false concepts such as self and other, life and death, heaven and
earth, and so on. Those who become entangled in these false ideas are
prevented from perceiving the Integral Oneness. The highest virtue
one can exercise is to accept the responsibility of discovering and
transmitting the whole truth. Some help others in order to receive
blessings and admiration. This is simply meaningless. Some cultivate
themselves in part to serve others, in part to serve their own pride.
They will understand, at best, half of the truth. But those who improve
themselves for the sake of the world--to these, the whole truth of the
universe will be revealed. So seek this whole truth, practice it in your
daily life, and humbly share it with others. You will enter the realm of
the divine.
17
Do not go about worshipping deities and religious institutions as the
source of the subtle truth. To do so is to place intermediaries between
yourself and the divine, and to make of yourself a beggar who looks
outside for a treasure that is hidden inside his own breast. If you want
to worship the Tao, first discover it in your own heart. Then your
worship will be meaningful.
18
There is no one method for attaining realization of the Tao. To regard
any method as the method is to create a duality, which can only delay
your understanding of the subtle truth. The mature person perceives
the fruitlessness of rigid, external methodologies; Remembering this,
he keeps his attitude unstructured at all times and thus is always free
to pursue the Integral Way. He studies the teachings of the masters.
He dissolves all concepts of duality. He pours himself out in service to
others. He performs his inner cleansing and does not disturb his
teacher with unnecessary entanglements, thus preserving the subtle
spiritual connection with the teacher’s divine energy. Gently
eliminating all obstacles to his own understanding, he constantly
maintains his unconditional sincerity. His humility, perseverance, and
adaptability evoke the response of the universe and fill him with divine
light.
19
To the ordinary person, the body of humanity seems vast. In truth, it
is neither bigger nor smaller than anything else. To the ordinary
person, there are others whose awareness needs raising. In truth,
there is no self, and no other. To the ordinary person, the temple is
sacred and the field is not. This, too, is a dualism which runs counter
to the truth. Those who are highly evolved maintain an
undiscriminating perception. Seeing everything, labeling nothing, they
maintain their awareness of the Great Oneness. Thus they are
supported by it.
20
The clairvoyant may see forms which are elsewhere, but he cannot see
the formless. The telepathic may communicate directly with the mind
of another, but he cannot communicate with one who has achieved nomind.
The telekinetic may move an object without touching it, but he
cannot move the intangible. Such abilities have meaning only in the
realm of duality. Therefore, they are meaningless. Within the Great
Oneness, though there is no such thing as clairvoyance, telepathy, or
telekinesis, all things are seen, all things understood, all things forever
in their proper places.
21
Each moment is fragile and fleeting. The moment of the past cannot
be kept, however beautiful. The moment of the present cannot be
held, however enjoyable. The moment of the future cannot be caught,
however desirable. But the mind is desperate to fix the river in place:
Possessed by ideas of the past, preoccupied with images of the future,
it overlooks the plain truth of the moment. The one who can dissolve
her mind will suddenly discover the Tao at her feet, and clarity at
hand.
22
How can the divine Oneness be seen? In beautiful forms, breathtaking
wonders, awe- inspiring miracles? The Tao is not obliged to present
itself this way. It is always present and always available. When speech
is exhausted and mind dissolved, it presents itself. When clarity and
purity are cultivated, it reveals itself. When sincerity is unconditional,
it unveils itself. If you are willing to be lived by it, you will see it
everywhere, even in the most ordinary things.
23
The highest truth cannot be put into words. Therefore the greatest
teacher has nothing to say. He simply gives himself in service, and
never worries.
24
Subtle awareness of the truth of the universe should not be regarded
as an achievement. To think in terms of achieving it is to place it
outside your own nature. This is erroneous and misleading. Your
nature and the integral nature of the universe are one and the same:
indescribable, but eternally present. Simply open yourself to this.
25
Not all spiritual paths lead to the Harmonious Oneness. Indeed, most
are detours and distractions, nothing more. Why not trust the
plainness and simplicity of the Integral Way? Living with unconditional
sincerity, eradicating all duality, celebrating the equality of things,
your every moment will be in truth.
26
There are two kinds of blessings. The first are worldly blessings, which
are won by doing good deeds. These concern the mind, and thus are
confined in time and space. The second is the integral blessing, which
falls on those who achieve awareness of the Great Oneness. This
awareness liberates you from the bondage of mind, time, and space to
fly freely through the boundless harmony of the Tao. Similarly, there
are two kinds of wisdom. The first is worldly wisdom, which is a
conceptual understanding of your experiences. Because it follows after
the events themselves, it necessarily inhibits your direct understanding
of truth. The second kind, integral wisdom, involves a direct
participation in every moment: the observer and the observed are
dissolved in the light of pure awareness, and no mental concepts or
attitudes are present to dim that light. The blessings and wisdom that
accrue to those who practice the Integral Way and lead others to it are
a billion times greater than all worldly blessings and wisdom combined.
27
Do not imagine that an integral being has the ambition of enlightening
the unaware or raising worldly people to the divine realm. To her,
there is no self and other, and hence no one to be raised; no heaven
and hell, and hence no destination. Therefore her only concern is her
own sincerity.
28
It is tempting to view the vast and luminous heavens as the body of
the Tao. That would be a mistake, however. If you identify the Tao
with a particular shape, you won’t ever see it.
29
Don’t think you can attain total awareness and whole enlightenment
without proper discipline and practice. This is egomania. Appropriate
rituals channel your emotions and life energy toward the light. Without
the discipline to practice them, you will tumble constantly backward
into darkness. Here is the great secret: Just as high awareness of the
subtle truth is gained through virtuous conduct and sustaining
disciplines, so also is it maintained through these things. Highly
evolved beings know and respect the truth of this.
30
Words can never convey the beauty of a tree; to understand it, you
must see it with your own eyes. Language cannot capture the melody
of a song; to understand it, you must hear it with your own ears. So it
is with the Tao: the only way to understand it is to directly experience
it. The subtle truth of the universe is unsayable and unthinkable.
Therefore the highest teachings are wordless. My own words are not
the medicine, but a prescription; not the destination, but a map to
help you reach it. When you get there, quiet your mind and close your
mouth. Don’t analyze the Tao. Strive instead to live it: silently,
undividedly, with your whole harmonious being.
31
The Tao doesn’t come and go. It is always present everywhere, just
like the sky. If your mind is clouded, you won’t see it, but that doesn’t
mean it isn’t there. All misery is created by the activity of the mind.
Can you let go of words and ideas, attitudes and expectations? If so,
then the Tao will loom into view. Can you be still and look inside? If
so, then you will see that the truth is always available, always
responsive.
32
The ego says that the world is vast, and that the particles which form
it are tiny. When tiny particles join, it says, the vast world appears.
When the vast world disperses, it says, tiny particles appear. The ego
is entranced by all these names and ideas, but the subtle truth is that
world and particle are the same; neither one vast, neither one tiny.
Every thing is equal to every other thing. Names and concepts only
block your perception of this Great Oneness. Therefore it is wise to
ignore them. Those who live inside their egos are continually
bewildered: they struggle frantically to know whether things are large
or small, whether or not there is a purpose to joining or dispersing,
whether the universe is blind and mechanical or the divine creation of
a conscious being. In reality there are no grounds for having beliefs or
making comments about such things. Look behind them instead, and
you will discern the deep, silent, complete truth of the Tao. Embrace
it, and your bewilderment vanishes.
33
Just as the world can reveal itself as particles, the Tao can reveal itself
as human beings. Though world and particles aren’t the same, neither
are they different. Though the cosmic body and your body aren’t the
same, neither are they different. Worlds and particles, bodies and
beings, time and space: All are transient expressions of the Tao.
Unseeable, ungraspable, the Tao is beyond any attempt to analyze or
categorize it. At the same time, its truth is everywhere you turn. If you
can let go of it with your mind and surround it with your heart, it will
live inside you forever.
34
All things in the universe move from the subtle to the manifest and
back again. Whether the form is that of a star or a person, the process
is the same. First, the subtle energy exists. Next, it becomes manifest
and takes on life. After a time, the life passes away, but the subtle
energy goes on, either returning to the subtle realm, where it remains,
or once again attaching to manifest things. The character of your
existence is determined by the energies to which you connect yourself.
If you attach yourself to gross energies--loving this person, hating that
clan, rejecting one experience or habitually indulging in another--then
you will lead a series of heavy, attached lives. This can go on for a
very long and tedious time. The way of the integral being is to join
with higher things. By holding to that which is refined and subtle, she
traverses refined and subtle realms. If she enters the world, she does
so lightly, without attachment. In this way she can go anywhere
without ever leaving the center of the universe.
35
Intellectual knowledge exists in and of the brain. Because the brain is
part of the body, which must one day expire, this collection of facts,
however large and impressive, will expire as well. Insight, however, is
a function of the spirit. Because your spirit follows you through cycle
after cycle of life, death, and rebirth, you have the opportunity of
cultivating insight in an ongoing fashion. Refined over time, insight
becomes pure, constant, and unwavering. This is the beginning of
immortality.
36
It is entirely possible for you to achieve immortality, and to experience
absolute joy and freedom forever. The practice of undiscriminating
virtue is the means to this end. Practicing kindness and selflessness,
you naturally align your life with the Integral Way. Aligning your life
with the Integral Way, you begin to eliminate the illusory boundaries
between people and societies, between darkness and light, between
life and death. Eliminating these illusions, you gain the company of the
highest spiritual beings. In their company, you are protected from
negative influences and your life energy cannot be dissolved. Thus do
you achieve immortality. Remember: it is not that those who cultivate
wholeness and virtue in themselves do not encounter difficulties in life.
It is that they understand that difficulties are the very road to
immortality: by meeting them calmly and openly, however they
unfold, and joyfully developing themselves in response to them, they
become as natural, as complete, and as eternal as the Tao itself.
37
A superior person cares for the well-being of all things. She does this
by accepting responsibility for the energy she manifests, both actively
and in the subtle realm. Looking at a tree, she sees not an isolated
event but root, leaves, trunk, water, soil and sun: each event related
to the others, and "tree" arising out of their relatedness. Looking at
herself or another, she sees the same thing. Trees and animals,
humans and insects, flowers and birds: These are active images of the
subtle energies that flow from the stars throughout the universe.
Meeting and combining with each other and the elements of the earth,
they give rise to all living things. The superior person understands this,
and understands that her own energies play a part in it. Understanding
these things, she respects the earth as her mother, the heavens as her
father, and all living things as her brothers and sisters. Caring for
them, she knows that she cares for herself. Giving to them, she knows
that she gives to herself. At peace with them, she is always at peace
with herself.
38
Why scurry about looking for the truth? It vibrates in every thing and
every not-thing, right off the tip of your nose. Can you be still and see
it in the mountain? the pine tree? yourself? Don’t imagine that you’ll
discover it by accumulating more knowledge. Knowledge creates
doubt, and doubt makes you ravenous for more knowledge. You can’t
get full eating this way. The wise person dines on something more
subtle: He eats the understanding that the named was born from the
unnamed, that all being flows from non- being, that the describable
world emanates from an indescribable source. He finds this subtle
truth inside his own self, and becomes completely content. So who can
be still and watch the chess game of the world? The foolish are always
making impulsive moves, but the wise know that victory and defeat
are decided by something more subtle. They see that something
perfect exists before any move is made. This subtle perfection
deteriorates when artificial actions are taken, so be content not to
disturb the peace. Remain quiet. Discover the harmony in your own
being. Embrace it. If you can do this, you will gain everything, and the
world will become healthy again. If you can’t, you will be lost in the
shadows forever.
39
If you go searching for the Great Creator, you will come back emptyhanded.
The source of the universe is ultimately unknowable, a great
invisible river flowing forever through a vast and fertile valley. Silent
and uncreated, it creates all things. All things are brought forth from
the subtle realm into the manifest world by the mystical intercourse of
yin and yang. The dynamic river yang pushes forward, the still valley
yin is receptive, and through their integration things come into
existence. This is known as the Great Tai Chi. Tai chi is the integral
truth of the universe. Everything is a tai chi: your body, the cosmic
body, form, appearance, wisdom, energy, the unions of people, the
dispersal of time and places. Each brings itself into existence through
the integration of yin and yang, maintains itself, and disperses itself
without the direction of any creator. Your creation, your selftransformation,
the accumulation of energy and wisdom, the decline
and cessation of your body: all these take place by themselves within
the subtle operation of the universe. Therefore agitated effort is not
necessary. Just be aware of the Great Tai Chi.
40
The natural laws of the universe are inviolable: Energy condenses into
substance. Food is eaten through the mouth and not the nose. A
person who neglects to breathe will turn blue and die. Some things
simply can’t be dismissed. It is also a part of the cosmic law that what
you say and do determines what happens in your life. The ordinary
person thinks that this law is external to himself and he feels confined
and controlled by it. So his desires trouble his mind, his mind troubles
his spirit, and he lives in constant turmoil with himself and the world.
His whole life is spent in struggling. The superior person recognizes
that he and the subtle law are one. Therefore he cultivates himself to
accord with it, bringing moderation to his actions and clarity to his
mind. Doing this, he finds himself at one with all that is divine and
enlightened. His days are passed drinking in serenity and breathing
out contentment. This is the profound, simple truth: You are the
master of your life and death. What you do is what you are.
41
Good and bad, self and others, life and death: Why affirm these
concepts? Why deny them? To do either is to exercise the mind, and
the integral being knows that the manipulations of the mind are
dreams, delusions, and shadows. Hold one idea, and another competes
with it. Soon the two will be in conflict with a third, and in time your
life is all chatter and contradiction. Seek instead to keep your mind
undivided. Dissolve all ideas into the Tao.
42
Nothing in the realm of thoughts or ideologies is absolute. Lean on one
for long, and it collapses. Because of this, there is nothing more futile
and frustrating than relying on the mind. To arrive at the unshakable,
you must befriend the Tao. To do this, quiet your thinking. Stop
analyzing, dividing, making distinctions between one thing and
another. Simply see that you are at the center of the universe, and
accept all things and beings as parts of your infinite body. When you
perceive that an act done to another is done to yourself, you have
understood the great truth.
43
In ancient times, people lived holistic lives. They didn’t overemphasize
the intellect, but integrated mind, body, and spirit in all things. This
allowed them to become masters of knowledge rather than victims of
concepts. If a new invention appeared, they looked for the troubles it
might cause as well as the shortcuts it offered. They valued old ways
that had been proven effective, and they valued new ways if they
could be proven effective. If you want to stop being confused, then
emulate these ancient folk: join your body, mind, and spirit in all you
do. Choose food, clothing, and shelter that accords with nature. Rely
on your own body for transportation. Allow your work and your
recreation to be one and the same. Do exercise that develops your
whole being and nor just your body. Listen to music that bridges the
three spheres of your being. Choose leaders for their virtue rather
than their wealth or power. Serve others and cultivate yourself
simultaneously. Understand that true growth comes from meeting and
solving the problems of life in a way that is harmonizing to yourself
and to others. If you can follow these simple old ways, you will be
continually renewed.
44
This is the nature of the unenlightened mind: The sense organs, which
are limited in scope and ability, randomly gather information. This
partial information is arranged into judgements, which are based on
previous judgements, which are usually based on someone else’s
foolish ideas. These false concepts and ideas are then stored in a
highly selective memory system. Distortion upon distortion: the
mental energy flows constantly through contorted and inappropriate
channels, and the more one uses the mind, the more confused one
becomes. To eliminate the vexation of the mind, it doesn’t help to do
something; this only reinforces the mind’s mechanics. Dissolving the
mind is instead a matter of not-doing: Simply avoid becoming
attached to what you see and think. Relinquish the notion that you are
separated from the all-knowing mind of the universe. Then you can
recover your original pure insight and see through all illusions.
Knowing nothing, you will be aware of everything. Remember:
because clarity and enlightenment are within your own nature, they
are regained without moving an inch.
45
If you correct your mind, the rest of your life will fall into place. This is
true because the mind is the governing aspect of a human life. If the
river flows clearly and cleanly through the proper channel, all will be
well along its banks. The Integral Way depends on decreasing, not
increasing; To correct your mind, rely on not-doing. Stop thinking and
clinging to complications; keep your mind detached and whole.
Eliminate mental muddiness and obscurity; keep your mind crystal
clear. Avoid daydreaming and allow your pure original insight to
emerge. Quiet your emotions and abide in serenity. Don’t go crazy
with the worship of idols, images, and ideas; this is like putting a new
head on top of the head you already have. Remember: if you can
cease all restless activity, your integral nature will appear.
46
The Tao gives birth to One. One gives birth to yin and yang. Yin and
yang give birth to all things. Now forget this. The complete whole is
the complete whole. So also is any part the complete whole. Forget
this, too. Pain and happiness are simply conditions of the ego. Forget
the ego. Time and space are changing and dissolving, not fixed and
real. They can be thought of as accessories, but don’t think of them.
Supernatural beings without form extend their life force throughout
the universe to support beings both formed and unformed. But never
mind this; the supernatural is just a part of nature, like the natural.
The subtle truth emphasizes neither and includes both. All truth is in
tai chi: to cultivate the mind, body, or spirit, simply balance the
polarities. If people understood this, world peace and universal
harmony would naturally arise. But forget about understanding and
harmonizing and making all things one. The universe is already a
harmonious oneness; just realize it. If you scramble about in search of
inner peace, you will lose your inner peace.
47
Dualistic thinking is a sickness. Religion is a distortion. Materialism is
cruel. Blind spirituality is unreal. Chanting is no more holy than
listening to the murmur of a stream, counting prayer beads no more
sacred than simply breathing, religious robes no more spiritual than
work clothes. If you wish to attain oneness with the Tao, don’t get
caught up in spiritual superficialities. Instead, live a quiet and simple
life, free of ideas and concepts. Find contentment in the practice of
undiscriminating virtue, the only true power. Giving to others selflessly
and anonymously, radiating light throughout the world and
illuminating your own darknesses, your virtue becomes a sanctuary for
yourself and all beings. This is what is meant by embodying the Tao.
48
Do you wish to free yourself of mental and emotional knots and
become one with the Tao? If so, there are two paths available to you.
The first is the path of acceptance. Affirm everyone and everything.
Freely extend your goodwill and virtue in every direction, regardless of
circumstances. Embrace all things as part of the Harmonious Oneness,
and then you will begin to perceive it. The second path is that of
denial. Recognize that everything you see and think is a falsehood, an
illusion, a veil over the truth. Peel all the veils away, and you will
arrive at the Oneness. Though these paths are entirely different, they
will deliver you to the same place: spontaneous awareness of the
Great Oneness. Once you arrive there, remember: it isn’t necessary to
struggle to maintain unity with it. All you have to do is participate in it.
49
Thinking and talking about the Integral Way are not the same as
practicing it. Who ever became a good rider by talking about horses? If
you wish to embody the Tao, stop chattering and start practicing.
Relax your body and quiet your senses. Return your mind to its
original clarity. Forget about being separated from others and from the
Divine Source. As you return to the Oneness, do not think of it or be in
awe of it. This is just another way of separating from it. Simply merge
into truth, and allow it to surround you.
50
What good is it to spend your life accumulating material things? It isn’t
in keeping with the Tao. What benefit in conforming your behavior to
someone’s conventions? It violates your nature and dissipates your
energy. Why separate your spiritual life and your practical life? To an
integral being, there is no such distinction. Live simply and virtuously,
true to your nature, drawing no line between what is spiritual and
what is not. Ignore time. Relinquish ideas and concepts. Embrace the
Oneness. This is the Integral Way.
51
Those who want to know the truth of the universe should practice the
four cardinal virtues. The first is reverence for all life; this manifests as
unconditional love and respect for oneself and all other beings. The
Second is natural sincerity; this manifests as honesty, simplicity, and
faithfulness. The third is gentleness; this manifests as kindness,
consideration for others, and sensitivity to spiritual truth. The fourth is
supportiveness; this manifests as service to others without expectation
of reward. The four virtues are not an external dogma but a part of
your original nature. When practiced, they give birth to wisdom and
evoke the five blessings: health, wealth, happiness, longevity, and
peace.
52
Do you think you can clear your mind by sitting constantly in silent
meditation? This makes your mind narrow, not clear. Integral
awareness is fluid and adaptable, present in all places and at all times.
That is true meditation. Who can attain clarity and simplicity by
avoiding the world? The Tao is clear and simple, and it doesn’t avoid
the world. Why not simply honor your parents, love your children, help
your brothers and sisters, be faithful to your friends, care for your
mate with devotion, complete your work cooperatively and joyfully,
assume responsibility for problems, practice virtue without first
demanding it of others, understand the highest truths yet retain an
ordinary manner? That would be true clarity, true simplicity, true
mastery.
53
True understanding in a person has two attributes: awareness and
action. Together they form a natural tai chi. Who can enjoy
enlightenment and remain indifferent to suffering in the world? This is
not in keeping with the Way. Only those who increase their service
along with their understanding can be called men and women of Tao.
54
In ancient times, various holistic sciences were developed by highly
evolved beings to enable their own evolution and that of others. These
subtle arts were created through the linking of individual minds with
the universal mind. They are still taught by traditional teachers to
those who display virtue and desire to assist others. The student who
seeks our and studies these teachings furthers the evolution of
mankind as well as her own spiritual unfolding. The student who
ignores them hinders the development of all beings.
55
The holistic practices of the ancient masters integrate science, art, and
personal spiritual development. Mind, body, and spirit participate in
them equally. They include:
Yi Yau, the healing science which incorporates diagnosis, acupuncture,
herbal medicine, therapeutic diet, and other methods;
Syang Ming, the science which predicts a person’s destiny by
observing the outward physical manifestations of his face, skeleton,
palms, and voice;
Feng Shui, the science of discerning the subtle energy rays present in
a geographic location to determine whether they will properly support
the activities of a building or town constructed there;
Fu Kua, the observation of the subtle alterations of yin and yang for
the purpose of making decisions which are harmonious with the
apparent and hidden aspects of a situation. The foundation of Fu Kua
and of all Taoist practice is the study of the I Ching, or Book of
Changes.
Nei Dan, Wai Dan, and Fang Jung, the sciences of refining one’s
personal energy through alchemy, chemistry, and the cultivation of
balanced sexual energy;
Tai Syi, the science of revitalization through breathing and
visualization techniques;
Chwun Shi, the transformation of one’s spiritual essence through
keeping one’s thoughts in accord with the Divine Source;
Shu-Ser, the attunement of one’s daily life to the cycle of universal
energy rays;
Bi Gu, the practice of fasting on specific days in order to gather life
energy emanating from the harmonized positions of certain stars;
Sau Yi, the science of embracing integral transcendental oneness in
order to accomplish conception of the ’mystical pearl’;
Tai Chi Ch’uan, the performance of physical exercises to induce and
direct energy flows within the body to gain mastery of body, breath,
mind, the internal organs, and life and death;
Fu Chi, the science of reforming and refining one’s energy with pure
food and herbs;
Chuan Se, the inner visualization of the unity of one’s inner and outer
being;
’Dzai Jing, the purification of one’s energy through ascetic practices;
Fu Jou, the drawing of mystical pictures and the writing and recital of
mystical invocations for the purpose of evoking a response from the
subtle realm of the universe;
Tsan Syan, the process of dissolving the ego and connecting with the
Great Oneness through the study of classical scriptures and daily
dialogue with an enlightened master;
Lyou Yen and Chi Men, the mystical sciences of energy linkage for the
purpose of influencing external affairs. Of these, the most important
for beginners is the study of the I Ching, which enables one to
perceive the hidden influences in every situation and thus establish a
balanced and spiritually evolved means of responding to them. All are
instruments for attaining the Tao. To study them is to serve universal
unity, harmony, and wisdom.
56
If you wish to become a person of Tao, then study that which serves
the nature of life, and offer it to the world. Allow your devotion to
learning the Taoist ways to be complete. Partial practice and partial
discipline won’t do. You can’t know the body by studying the finger,
and you can’t understand the universe by learning one science. If you
study the whole of the Tao wholeheartedly, then everything in your life
will reflect it.
57
The universe is a vast net of energy rays. The primary ray is that
which emanates from the Subtle Origin, and it is entirely positive,
creative, and constructive. Each being, however, converts the energy
of this primary ray into its own ray, and these lower rays can be either
positive or negative, constructive or destructive. An individual who is
not yet fully evolved can be adversely affected by negative energy
rays in the net around him. For example, the combined influence of
several negative rays might cause an undeveloped person to believe
that his life is being controlled by an invisible, oppressive ruler. Such a
misconception can be a significant barrier to enlightenment. To attain
full evolution and the status of an integral being, you must be aware of
this intricate net and its influences upon you. By integrating the
positive, harmonious energy rays with the positive elements of your
own being, and eliminating the subtle negative influences, you can
enhance all aspects of your life. In order to eliminate the negative
influences, simply ignore them. To integrate the positive influences,
consciously reconnect yourself with the primary energy ray of the
Subtle Origin by adopting the practices of the Integral Way. Then all
the rays in the net around you will merge back into harmonious
oneness.
58
Unless the mind, body, and spirit are equally developed and fully
integrated, no spiritual peak or state of enlightenment can be
sustained. This is why extremist religions and ideologies do not bear
fruit. When the mind and spirit are forced into unnatural austerities or
adherence to external dogmas, the body grows sick and weak and
becomes a traitor to the whole being. When the body is emphasized to
the exclusion of the mind and spirit, they become like trapped snakes:
frantic, explosive, and poisonous to one’s person. All such imbalances
inevitably lead to exhaustion and expiration of the life force. True selfcultivation
involves the holistic integration of mind, body, and spirit.
Balancing yin and yang through the various practices of the Integral
Way, one achieves complete unity within and without. This manifests
in the world as perfect equilibrium, and perfect grace.
59
Greed for enlightenment and immortality is no different than greed for
material wealth. It is self-centered and dualistic, and thus an obstacle
to true attainment. Therefore these states are never achieved by those
who covet them; rather, they are the reward of the virtuous. If you
wish to become a divine immortal angel, then restore the angelic
qualities of your being through virtue and service. This is the only way
to gain the attention of the immortals who teach the methods of
energy enhancement and integration that are necessary to reach the
divine realm. These angelic teachers cannot be sought out; it is they
who seek out the student. When you succeed in connecting your
energy with the divine realm through high awareness and the practice
of undiscriminating virtue, the transmission of the ultimate subtle
truths will follow. This is the path that all angels take to the divine
realm.
60
The mystical techniques for achieving immortality are revealed only to
those who have dissolved all ties to the gross worldly realm of duality,
conflict, and dogma. As long as your shallow worldly ambitions exist,
the door will not open. Devote yourself to living a virtuous, integrated,
selfless life. Refine your energy from gross and heavy to subtle and
light. Use the practices of the Integral Way to transform your
superficial worldly personality into a profound, divine presence. By
going through each stage of development along the Integral Way, you
learn to value what is important today in the subtle realm rather than
what appears desirable tomorrow in the worldly realm. Then the
mystical door will open. and you can join the unruling rulers and
uncreating creators of the vast universe.
61
To understand the universe, you must study and understand these
things: First, the Oneness, the Tao, the Great Tai Chi Second, the
Great Two, the forces of yin and yang; Third, the Three Main
Categories, expressed either as Heaven, Earth, and Man, or as body
mind, and spirit; Fourth, the Four Forces, strong, weak, light, and
heavy; Fifth, the Five Elements, symbolized by water, fire, wood,
metal, and earth; Sixth, the Six Breaths--wind, cold, heat, moisture,
dryness, and inflammation--which transform the climate and the
internal organs; Seventh, the processes of change and recycling;
Eighth, the Eight Great Manifestations--Heaven, Earth, Water, Fire,
Thunder, Lake, Wind, and Mountain--the combinations of which reveal
the subtle energetic truth of all situations, as taught in the I Ching.
Understanding these things, you can employ them internally to leave
behind what is old and dead and to embrace what is new and alive.
Once discovered, this process of internal alchemy opens the mystical
gate to spiritual immortality.
62
Do you wish to attain pure Tao? Then you must understand and
integrate within yourself the three main energies of the universe. The
first is the earth energy. Centered in the belly, it expresses itself as
sexuality. Those who cultivate and master the physical energy attain
partial purity. The second is the heaven energy. Centered in the mind,
it expresses itself as knowledge and wisdom. Those whose minds
merge with the Universal Mind also attain partial purity. The third is
the harmonized energy. Centered in the heart, it expresses itself as
spiritual insight. Those who develop spiritual insight also attain partial
purity. Only when you achieve all three-mastery of the physical
energy, universal mindedness, and spiritual insight-and express them
in a virtuous integral life, can you attain pure Tao.
63
There are three layers to the universe: In the lower, Tai Ching, and
the middle, Shan Ching, the hindrance of a physical bodily existence is
required. Those who fail to live consistently in accord with Tao reside
here. In the upper, Yu Ching, there is only Tao: the bondage of form is
broken, and the only thing existing is the exquisite energy dance of
the immortal divine beings. Those who wish to enter Yu Ching should
follow the Integral Way. Simplify the personality, refine the sexual
energy upward, integrate yin and yang in body, mind, and spirit,
practice non-impulsiveness, make your conscience one with pure law,
and you will uncover truth after truth and enter the exquisite upper
realm. This path is clearly defined and quite simple to follow, yet most
lose themselves in ideological fogs of their own making.
64
In earlier times, people lived simply and serenely. Sensitive to the
fluctuations that constantly occur, they were able to adjust
comfortably to the energy of the day. Today, people lead hysterical,
impulsive lives. Ignoring the subtle alterations of yin and yang which
influence all things, they become confused, exhausted, and frustrated.
However, even today one can restore wholeness and clarity to one’s
mind. The way to do this is through study of the I Ching. Like the cycle
of day and night, everything is a tai chi incorporating movements
between yin and yang. If you do not see the patterns in these
movements, you are lost. But if you consult the I Ching with an open
mind, you will begin to see the patterns underlying all things. Knowing
that daybreak will come, you can rest peacefully at night. When you
accurately perceive the fluidity of things, you also begin to perceive
the constancy behind them: the creative, transformative, boundless,
immutable Tao. To see this is the ultimate education, and the ultimate
solace.
65
The interplay of yin and yang within the womb of the Mysterious
Mother creates the expansion and contraction of nature. Although the
entire universe is created out of this reproductive dance, it is but a tiny
portion of her being. Her heart is the Universal Heart, and her mind
the Universal Mind. The reproductive function is also a part of human
beings. Because yin and yang are not complete within us as
individuals, we pair up to integrate them and bring forth new life.
Although most people spend their entire lives following this biological
impulse, it is only a tiny portion of our beings as well. If we remain
obsessed with seeds and eggs, we are married to the fertile
reproductive valley of the Mysterious Mother but not to her
immeasurable heart and all-knowing mind. If you wish to unite with
her heart and mind, you must integrate yin and yang within and refine
their fire upward. Then you have the power to merge with the whole
being of the Mysterious Mother. This is what is known as true
evolution.
66
The first integration of yin and yang is the union of seed and egg
within the womb. The second integration of yin and yang is the sexual
union of the mature male and female. Both of these are concerned
with flesh and blood, and all that is conceived in this realm must one
day disintegrate and pass away. It is only the third integration which
gives birth to something immortal, In this integration, a highly evolved
individual joins the subtle inner energies of yin and yang under the
light of spiritual understanding. Through the practices of the Integral
Way he refines his gross, heavy energy into something ethereal and
light. This divine light has the capability of penetrating into the mighty
ocean of spiritual energy and complete wisdom that is the Tao. The
new life created by the final integration is self- aware yet without ego,
capable of inhabiting a body yet not attached to it, and guided by
wisdom rather than emotion. Whole and virtuous, it can never die.
67
To achieve the highest levels of life, one must continually combine new
levels of yin and yang. In nature, the male energy can be found in
such sources as the sun and the mountains, and the female in such
sources as the earth, the moon, and the lakes. Those who study these
things, which are only hinted at here, will benefit immeasurably.
Because higher and higher unions of yin and yang are necessary for
the conception of higher life, some students may be instructed in the
art of dual cultivation, in which yin and yang are directly integrated in
the tai chi of sexual intercourse. If the student is not genuinely
virtuous and the instruction not that of a true master, dual cultivation
can have a destructive effect. If genuine virtue and true mastery come
together, however, the practice can bring about a profound balancing
of the student’s gross and subtle energies. The result of this is
improved health, harmonized emotions, the cessation of desires and
impulses, and, at the highest level, the transcendent integration of the
entire energy body.
68
In angelic dual cultivation, one learns to follow the Tao. To approach
the Tao, you will need all your sincerity, for it is elusive, first revealing
itself in form and image, then dissolving into subtle, indefinable
essence. Though it is uncreated itself, it creates all things. Because it
has no substance, it can enter into where there is no space. Exercising
by returning to itself, winning victories by remaining gentle and
yielding, it is softer than anything, and therefore it overcomes
everything hard. What does this tell you about the benefit of nonaction
and silence?
69
A person’s approach to sexuality is a sign of his level of evolution.
Unevolved persons practice ordinary sexual intercourse. Placing all
emphasis upon the sexual organs, they neglect the body’s other
organs and systems. Whatever physical energy is accumulated is
summarily discharged, and the subtle energies are similarly dissipated
and disordered. It is a great backward leap. For those who aspire to
the higher realms of living, there is angelic dual cultivation. Because
every portion of the body, mind, and spirit yearns for the integration
of yin and yang, angelic intercourse is led by the spirit rather than the
sexual organs. Where ordinary intercourse is effortful, angelic
cultivation is calm, relaxed, quiet, and natural. Where ordinary
intercourse unites sex organs with sex organs, angelic cultivation
unites spirit with spirit, mind with mind, and every cell of one body
with every cell of the other body. Culminating not in dissolution but in
integration, it is an opportunity for a man and woman to mutually
transform and uplift each other into the realm of bliss and wholeness.
The sacred ways of angelic intercourse are taught only by one who has
himself achieved total energy integration, and taught only to students
who follow the Integral Way with profound devotion, seeking to purify
and pacify the entire world along with their own being. However, if
your virtue is especially radiant, it can be possible to open a pathway
to the subtle realm and receive these celestial teachings directly from
the immortals.
70
The cords of passion and desire weave a binding net around you.
Worldly confrontation makes you stiff and inflexible. The trap of duality
is tenacious. Bound, rigid, and trapped, you cannot experience
liberation. Through dual cultivation it is possible to unravel the net,
soften the rigidity, dismantle the trap. Dissolving your yin energy into
the source of universal life, attracting the yang energy from that same
source, you leave behind individuality and your life becomes pure
nature. Free of ego, living naturally, working virtuously, you become
filled with inexhaustible vitality and are liberated forever from the
cycle of death and rebirth. Understand this if nothing else: spiritual
freedom and oneness with the Tao are not randomly bestowed gifts,
but the rewards of conscious self-transformation and self-evolution.
71
The transformation toward eternal life is gradual. The heavy, gross
energy of body, mind, and spirit must first be purified and uplifted.
When the energy ascends to the subtle level, then self-mastery can be
sought. A wise instructor teaches the powerful principles of selfintegration
only to those who have already achieved a high level of
self-purification and self-mastery. In addition, all proper teaching
follows the law of energy response: the most effective method is
always that to which the student’s natural energy most harmoniously
responds. For one, celibacy and self-cultivation will be appropriate; for
another, properly guided dual cultivation will derive the greatest
benefit. A discerning teacher will determine the proper balance of
practices for each individual. In any case, know that all teachers and
techniques are only transitional: true realization comes from the direct
merger of one’s being with the divine energy of the Tao.
72
If you wish to gain merit and become one with the divine, then
develop your virtue and extend it to the world. Abandon fancy
theologies and imaginary ideas and do some ordinary daily work, such
as healing. Let go of all conflict and strife. Practice unswerving
kindness and unending patience. Avoid following impulses and
pursuing ambitions which destroy the wholeness of your mind and
separate you from the Integral Way. Neither become obsessed with
circumstances nor forego awareness of them. To manage your mind,
know that there is nothing, and then relinquish all attachment to the
nothingness.
73
The teacher cannot aid the student as long as the student’s spirit is
contaminated. The cleansing of the spiritual contamination is not the
responsibility of the teacher, but of the student. It is accomplished by
offering one’s talent, resources, and life to the world. Also, to the
teacher and to the immortal angels that surround him, a healthy
student can offer his pure energy, and a depleted student can give at
the very least food, or wine, or service. When one gives whatever one
can without restraint, the barriers of individuality break down. It no
longer becomes possible to tell whether it is the student offering
himself to the teacher, or the teacher offering herself to the student.
One sees only two immaculate beings, reflecting one another like a
pair of brilliant mirrors.
74
There are those who derive energy from worshipping and meditating
on divine beings and deities. If you feel inclined to worship, then
worship these: Worship the fiery sun, repository of yang, and the
watery moon, repository of yin; Worship the spiritual centers of men
and women, which are angelic in every sense; Worship the Eight Great
Manifestations: Heaven, Earth, Water, Fire, Thunder, Lake, Wind, and
Mountain; Worship the sixty-four hexagrams of the I Ching, which
illuminate the underlying harmony of the universe; Finally, worship the
Great Tai Chi, in which all things are contained, balanced, and
reposed.
75
Would you like to liberate yourself from the lower realms of life? Would
you like to save the world from the degradation and destruction it
seems destined for? Then step away from shallow mass movements
and quietly go to work on your own self-awareness. If you want to
awaken all of humanity, then awaken all of yourself. If you want to
eliminate the suffering in the world, then eliminate all that is dark and
negative in yourself. Truly, the greatest gift you have to give is that of
your own self-transformation. So find a teacher who is an integral
being, a beacon who extends his light and virtue with equal ease to
those who appreciate him and those who don’t. Shape yourself in his
mold, bathe in his nourishing radiance, and reflect it out to the rest of
the world. You will come to understand an eternal truth: there is
always a peaceful home for a virtuous being.
76
Who can save the world? Perhaps one who devotedly follows these
teachings, who calms her mind, who ignores all divergence, who
develops a high awareness of the subtle truths, who merges her virtue
with the universal virtue and extends it to the world without
expectation of reward. She will indeed be the savior of the world.
77
Humanity grows more and more intelligent, yet there is clearly more
trouble and less happiness daily. How can this be so? It is because
intelligence is not the same thing as wisdom. When a society misuses
partial intelligence and ignores holistic wisdom, its people forget the
benefits of a plain and natural life. Seduced by their desires, emotions,
and egos, they become slaves to bodily demands, to luxuries, to power
and unbalanced religion and psychological excuses. Then the reign of
calamity and confusion begins. Nonetheless, superior people can
awaken during times of turmoil to lead others out of the mire. But how
can the one liberate the many? By first liberating his own being. He
does this nor by elevating himself, but by lowering himself. He lowers
himself to that which is simple, modest, true; integrating it into
himself, he becomes a master of simplicity, modesty, truth.
Completely emancipated from his former false life, he discovers his
original pure nature, which is the pure nature of the universe. Freely
and spontaneously releasing his divine energy, he constantly
transcends complicated situations and draws everything around him
back into an integral oneness. Because he is a living divinity, when he
acts, the universe acts.
78
There are many partial religions, and then there is the Integral Way.
Partial religions are desperate, clever, human inventions; the Integral
Way is a deep expression of the pure, whole, universal mind. Partial
religions rely on the hypnotic manipulation of undeveloped minds; the
Integral Way is founded on the free transmission of the plain, natural,
immutable truth. It is a total reality, not an occult practice. The
Integral Way eschews conceptual fanaticism, extravagant living, fancy
food, violent music. They spoil the serenity of one’s mind and obstruct
one’s spiritual development. Renouncing what is fashionable and
embracing what is plain, honest, and virtuous, the Integral Way
returns you to the subtle essence of life. Adopt its practices and you
will become like they are: honest, simple, true, virtuous, whole. You
see, in partial pursuits, one’s transformation is always partial as well.
But in integral self-cultivation, it is possible to achieve a complete
metamorphosis, to transcend your emotional and biological limitations
and evolve to a higher state of being. By staying out of the shadows
and following this simple path, you become extraordinary,
unfathomable, a being of profound cosmic subtlety. You outlive time
and space by realizing the subtle truth of the universe.
79
Those in future generations who study and practice the truth of these
teachings will be blessed. They will acquire the subtle light of wisdom,
the mighty sword of clarity that cuts through all obstruction, and the
mystical pearl of understanding that envelops the entire universe.
They will attain the insight necessary to perceive the integral truth of
the Tao. Following this truth with unabashed sincerity, they will
become it: whole, courageous, indestructible, unnameable.
80
The world is full of half-enlightened masters. Overly clever, too
"sensitive" to live in the real world, they surround themselves with
selfish pleasures and bestow their grandiose teachings upon the
unwary. Prematurely publicizing themselves, intent upon reaching
some spiritual climax, they constantly sacrifice the truth and deviate
from the Tao. What they really offer the world is their own confusion.
The true master understands that enlightenment is not the end, but
the means. Realizing that virtue is her goal, she accepts the long and
often arduous cultivation that is necessary to attain it. She doesn’t
scheme to become a leader, but quietly shoulders whatever
responsibilities fall to her. Unattached to her accomplishments, taking
credit for nothing at all, she guides the whole world by guiding the
individuals who come to her. She shares her divine energy with her
students, encouraging them, creating trials to strengthen them,
scolding them to awaken them, directing the streams of their lives
toward the infinite ocean of the Tao. If you aspire to this sort of
mastery, then root yourself in the Tao. Relinquish your negative habits
and attitudes. Strengthen your sincerity. Live in the real world, and
extend your virtue to it without discrimination in the daily round. Be
the truest father or mother, the truest brother or sister, the truest
friend, and the truest disciple. Humbly respect and serve your teacher,
and dedicate your entire being unwaveringly to self-cultivation. Then
you will surely achieve self-mastery and he able to help others in doing
the same.
81
With all this talking, what has been said? The subtle truth can be
pointed at with words, but it can’t be contained by them. Take time to
listen to what is said without words, to obey the law too subtle to be
written, to worship the unnameable and to embrace the unformed.
Love your life. Trust the Tao. Make love with the invisible subtle origin
of the universe, and you will give yourself everything you need. You
won’t have to hide away forever in spiritual retreats. You can be a
gentle, contemplative hermit right here in the middle of everything,
utterly unaffected, thoroughly sustained and rewarded by your integral
practices. Encouraging others, giving freely to all, awakening and
purifying the world with each movement and action, you’ll ascend to
the divine realm in broad daylight. The breath of the Tao speaks, and
those who are in harmony with it hear quite clearly.