[File: C:\Users\Cecil\Downloads\HEIDEGGER (2010) Logic The Question of Truth.pdf]
ee
° ° THOUGHT
Martin Heidegger ‘
THE QUESTION OF TRUTH
TRANSLATED BY
Thomas Sheehan
Mant came om a" Sr a RR eae
ho A
ised C—O
ee te alll ’ a 4 acres
ae eee 3 ae. ty sS 8 |
i ( : P . ~ =— 7, a - tae
j - . . & BBS
. ail . tae: eae? f ‘ ae
te Lrg SP hea
: i, ie?
hp AN eee
Pes s ! iy , ie ah, A a sal : peiteeal,
Se AAA
— ae m = *, : Tas Bi . ig % ® “Fl P ae
a - “ee oO ys - s ,
a ‘ . : ., ‘3 ' f# ae} '® * ‘i ‘ ao . sae
fl ie,’ oa - a ti ao - & - at at hae ‘> Te.
F —_
il ee 20 aA es 4
Logic
Studies in Continental Thought
EDITOR

JOHN SALLIS

CONSULTING EDITORS
Robert Bernasconi William L. McBride
Rudolf Bernet J. N. Mohanty
John D. Caputo Mary Rawlinson
David Carr Tom Rockmore
Edward S. Casey Calvin O. Schrag
Hubert L. Dreyfus +Reiner Schtirmann
Don Ihde Charles E. Scott
David Farrell Krell Thomas Sheehan
Lenore Langsdorf Robert Sokolowski
Alphonso Lingis Bruce W. Wilshire

David Wood
Martin Heidegger
Logic
The Question of Truth
Translated by
Thomas Sheehan
Indiana University Press
Bloomington and Indianapolis
This book is a publication of
Indiana University Press
601 North Morton Street
Bloomington, Indiana 47404-3797 USA
www.iupress.indiana.edu
Telephone orders 800-842-6796
Fax orders 812-855-7931
Orders by e-mail iuporder@indiana.edu
Published in German as Martin Heidegger, Gesamtausgabe 21:
Logik: Die Frage nach der Wahrheit (WS 1925-26), ed. Walter Biemel
© 1976 German edition by Vittorio Klostermann, Frankfurt am Main
Second edition © 1995 by Vittorio Klostermann, Frankfurt am Main
© 2010 English edition by Indiana University Press
All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or by any informa-
tion storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
The Association of American University Presses’ Resolution on Permissions consti-
tutes the only exception to this prohibition.

‘S) The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of the
American National Standard for Information Sciences— Permanence of Paper for
Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1992.

Manufactured in the United States of America
Heidegger, Martin, 1889-1976.

[Logik. English]

Logic : the question of truth / Martin Heidegger ; translated by Thomas Sheehan.
p. cm. — (Studies in Continental thought)

Fifty-three lectures delivered Nov. 5, 1925-Feb. 26, 1926 at Philipps-Universitat,
Marburg, Germany.

ISBN 978-0-253-35466-2 (cloth : alk. paper) 1. Logic. 2. Truth. 3. Time. I. Title.
B3279.H48L6313 2010
160—dc22

2009039679
12345 15 14 13 12 11 10
CONTENTS
Translator’s Foreword ix
INTRODUCTION
§1. The first, most literal meaning of the word “logic” 1]
§2. A first indication of the concept of the subject matter of “logic” 5
§3. A philosophizing logic and traditional scholastic logic 10
§4. The possibility and the being of truth in general. Skepticism 15
§5. Outline of the course. Bibliography 20
PROLEGOMENON.
The contemporary situation of philosophical logic.
(Psychologism and the question of truth) 27
§6. Psychologism: the name and the concept 29
§7. Husserl’s critique of psychologism 37
a) Some preliminaries of the critique 37
b) Demonstration of the fundamental errors 39
§8. The presuppositions of Husserl’s critique: a specific concept of
truth as the guiding idea 45
§9. The roots of these presuppositions 52
§10. Anti-critical questions. The need to take the question of the
essence of truth back to Aristotle 74
a) Why must the critique of psychologism be a
critique of psychology? 74
b) What positive contribution does the phenomenological
investigation of psychologism make to the question of
the concept and interpretation of the phenomenon of truth? 82
c) The connection between propositional and intuitional truth.
The need to return to Aristotle 90
Part I.
The problem of truth in the decisive origins of philosophical logic,
and the seedbed of traditional logic (focused on Aristotle)
§11. The place of truth, and Adyoc (proposition) 107
§12. The basic structure of Aoyoc and the phenomenon of
making sense 114
a) The as-structure of our primary way of understanding:
the hermeneutical “as” 120
b) The modification of the as-structure in the act of determining:
the apophantic “as” 129
§13. The conditions of the possibility of Adyoc being false. The question
of truth 136
a) Preparatory interpretation. Metaphysics IV 7 and V1 4, and De
interpretatione | 136
V
vi Contents
b) Truth and being. Interpretation of Metaphysics IX 10 143
c) The three conditions for the possibility of a statement
being false, taken in their interconnection 154
§14. The presupposition for Aristotle’s interpretation of truth as
the authentic determination of being 161
Part II.
The radicalized question: What is truth? (A retrieval of the analysis of
falsehood in terms of its ur-temporality)
§15. The idea of a phenomenological chronology 167
§16. The conditions of the possibility of falsehood within the
horizon of the analysis of existence 175
§17. Care as the being of existence. Concern-for and concern-about,
authenticity and inauthenticity 185
§18. The ur-temporality of care 195
§19. Preparatory considerations toward attaining an original
understanding of time. A return to the history of the
philosophical interpretation of the concept of time 203
§20. Hegel’s interpretation of time in the Encyclopaedia 208
§21. The influence of Aristotle on Hegel’s and Bergson’s
interpretation of time 218
§22. A preliminary look at the meaning of time in Kant’s
Critique of Pure Reason 224
§23. The interpretation of time in the Transcendental Analytic 226
a) An explanation of the notions “form” and “intuition” 227
b) The constitutive moments of ordering 235
c) Form of intuition and formal intuition 243
d) Space and time as given infinite magnitudes; quantum
and quantitas in Kant’s interpretation 246
§24. The function of time in the Transcendental Logic.
A characterization of the problematic 252
§25. The question of the unity of nature 258
§26. The original a priori of all combining—the transcendental
unity of apperception 264
§27. Time as the universal a priori form of all appearances 275
§28. Time as original pure self-affection 279
§29. The question about the connection between time as original
self-affection and the “I think” 284
§30. Interpretation of the First Analogy of Experience in the
light of our interpretation of time 286
Contents vii

§31. The schematism of the pure concepts of the understanding 294

a) Sensibilization of appearances 297

b) Sensibilization of empirical sensible concepts 298

c) Sensibilization of pure sensible concepts 300

d) Image and schema 301

e) Sensibilization of the pure concepts of understanding 309
§32. Number as the schema of quantity 313
§33. Sensation as the schema of reality 319
§34. Persistence as the schema of substance 323
§35. The time-determination of the synthesis speciosa 328
§36. The now-structure that we have attained: its character of

referral and of making present. The phenomenal

demonstrability and limits of Kant’s interpretation of time 330
§37. Time as an existential of human existence—temporality and

the structure of care. The statement as a making-present 337
Editor’s Afterword 345
Glossaries 347
Abbreviations 355
a
Translator’s Foreword
Martin Heidegger delivered the fifty-three lectures titled “Logic: The
Question of Truth,” four days a week from Thursday, 5 November
1925, to Friday, 26 February 1926, at Philipps-Universitat in Marburg.
It was during the span of this lecture-course that the dean of the phi-
losophy faculty walked into Heidegger’s office and told him, “You must
publish something now. Do you have an appropriate manuscript?”

Within a few months he would. As soon as the course ended, Hei-
degger went off to his cottage in Todtnauberg and started writing out
Being and Time by hand. By the end of March he had finished much of
Division One of the text, and by 20 April he and Husserl were reading
page-proofs of those sections. In short, the lecture-course translated
here is the last that Heidegger taught before rushing Being and Time to
press. This lecture-course and Heidegger’s 1927 text share many points
in common, above all a strong focus on the questions of truth and of
time.

Professor Walter Biemel’s afterword to the present volume sketches
a general outline of the course, and identifies the manuscripts and
typescripts he used as the basis of his German edition. In this fore-
word, I will simply discuss some matters related to this translation of
the course.

Professor Biemel based his German edition of the “Logic” course on
three texts: Heidegger’s handwritten lecture notes, Fritz Heidegger’s
typescript of those notes, and the word-for-word shorthand transcript
that Simon Moser made during Heidegger’s lectures and then typed
up and submitted to Heidegger for corrections and additions.

Of these three textual records, Biemel relied most heavily on the
handwritten notes that Heidegger drew up before the lectures. But
this entails, for example, that all but two of the quite helpful daily
summaries that Heidegger made of his previous lectures and delivered
at the beginning of the following lecture—more than 68,000 words in
all, equal to a small book—are omitted from GA 21 since they are not

ix
x Translator’s Foreword

found in his lecture notes. Likewise, insofar as they do not appear in
those same notes, the numerous and often lengthy asides which Hei-
degger made during the lectures and which are duly recorded by
Moser, are entirely absent from GA 21. If one hopes to study the words
that Heidegger spoke in this course, they will not be found so much in
the notes he prepared before his lectures as in a transcript of his viva
voce presentations, such as Simon Moser’s faithful record. In sum, the
German text of GA 21 is in no sense a critical edition of the lecture-
course titled “Logic: The Question of Truth,” but merely presents a
reconstruction of the course by the editor of GA 21—and a fairly nar-
row reconstruction at that.

I frequently make use of the Simon Moser typescript, without giv-
ing notice, in translating GA 21. I have also consulted the handwritten
notes of Helene Weiss, a student in the course (who eventually be-
came a professor in Britain), and the typescript of those notes made by
Ms. Weiss’s nephew, Ernst Tugendhat. My thanks to Professor Tu-
gendhat for making his aunt’s notes available to me in 1974, and to the
Stanford University Library Archives, which now holds the Weiss
notes, for granting me renewed access to them. As Professor Biemel
had also done, I have occasionally used these extra resources to clarify
the published text.

In bringing into English such a long and dense text, one could cer-
tainly do worse than follow the example of Timaeus and the exhorta-
tion he made to himself toward the beginning of the eponymous Pla-
tonic dialogue. After invoking the gods and goddesses, he says, “And in
addition I exhort myself to speak in a way that will be most intelligible
to you, Socrates” (27d). In the interest of some such intelligibility I have
freely followed common English usage, both rhetorical and syntactical,
in translating the text. English rhetoric privileges the active voice over
the passive and especially over such faux-reflexive constructions as
Etwas zeigt sich and the like. In the present translation, I often render the
passive voice by the active when it clarifies the sense of the passage,
promotes the fluency of the prose, and does no harm to the meaning of
the text. Likewise, I have broken down the frequently overlong para-
graphs and sentences of GA 21 into shorter ones. (Extreme examples
would include Heidegger’s sixty-one-line paragraph at GA 21, pp. 50-
52, or the seventy-nine-line paragraph at GA 21, pp. 191-193.) One is
reminded of Mark Twain’s quip that the German newspapers reported
a brilliant operation in which a surgeon in Hamburg had removed a
twelve (or was it seventeen?) syllable word from a German gentleman’s
stomach (see “The Awful German Language”).

The glossaries indicate how I translate some of Heidegger’s techni-
cal terms. Elsewhere I have made a case for always translating Dasein
into English, but for never translating it as “being-there” or “being-
Translator’s Foreword xi
here”—and least of all as “being t/here,” as in the English edition of
Contributions to Philosophy (p. xxxv). To render Dasein into English, I
have chosen the most formally indicative English term—namely,
“human existence.” I do not expect that this will satisfy many or end
the controversy over how to translate this key term. Rather, its advan-
tage lies in saying so very little while formally indicating, in a direct
way, the matter in question.

I frequently cite GA 21, the Moser transcript, and several other texts
by page and line. Thus, for instance, “p. 1.14-15” refers to page 1, lines
14 and 15. The line-count does not include the “header” or any empty
lines on the page, but does count the lines of section titles. Square
brackets in the translation indicate my own (a) footnotes and (b) in-
sertions into the text. Winged brackets indicate Heidegger’s own inser-
tions into the texts he is citing. Bracketed numbers indicate the begin-
ning of the German pages of Logik.

I wish to thank the National Endowment for the Humanities for a
grant to translate this text. Above all, I wish to thank Professor Corinne
Painter, for her extraordinary help with this translation during the
years of her graduate studies at Loyola University Chicago. Others who
have supported this work are Professors William J. Richardson, S.J.,
John Sallis, Theodore Kisiel, and Reginald Lilly, as well as Professor
David Schweickart, whose friendship and encouragement were of im-
mense help during our days as colleagues at Loyola.

Thomas Sheehan
Stanford University
Logic
a
INTRODUCTION
§1. The first, most literal meaning of the word “logic”
We begin our treatment with a preliminary understanding of what the
word “logic” means in its most direct and literal sense.

The terms “logic,” “physics,” and “ethics” come from the Greek words
Aoyucxh, pvouc, NOucr, to which éruothun is always to be added.
‘E7ttotryLi Means roughly the same as the German term Wissenschaft,
“science.” Wissenschaft, like the German word Landschaft, refers to a re-
gion, and in this case a specific self-enclosed whole comprised of a man-
ifold of grounded knowledge, that is, of cognitions drawn exclusively
and judiciously from the very things the science seeks to know.

‘EmttotHUN Aoyucr) is the science of Adyoc or Aéyetv (the science of
speaking), érttotrn cvoucr is the science of dvotc, and éruotHUN
rOucn is the science of }Ooc.!

"ETULOTHUN Pvokn is the science of dvotc, that is, of “nature” under-
stood in the broad sense of “world” or “cosmos.” For the Greeks, pUotc
takes in the entire realm of the world in the sense of what’s out there—
the totality of stars, earth, plants, animals, humans, and gods. Today
“physics” is one particular discipline within the general science of the
world: it is the science of the material, inanimate things of the world.
More specifically, in contrast to inorganic chemistry, for instance, it is
the science of matter in terms of its absolute laws of motion. As a mod-
ern science of nature, physics discloses only certain contexts of the
being of those beings that we call “the world.”

"ETLOTHUN NOucr is the science of H8oc, the science of the behavior
or comportment of human beings toward other people and toward

1. [The Simon Moser Nachschrift or transcript (hereafter cited as “Moser,” fol-
lowed by page and line) here corrects GA 21, p. 1.14-15. This is but one of the hun-
dreds of disconnects between Moser’s record of Heidegger’s spoken words during
the course and the text of GA 21.]

1
2 Introduction

themselves. It is the science of human being. Notice that we already
mentioned human being when we spoke about ézttothun Pvoucn, the
science of the world. But [2] now the subject matter is human being—
not as a thing that just shows up in the world, with nothing ontologi-
cally special about it that would set it off from plants and animals,
something that is just “out there” like the flora and fauna. Rather, in
the present case human beings are understood as beings that, so to
speak, take their very own being in hand.’

According to the divisions established by Hellenistic scholasticism,
these three é7otnuat make up philosophy, the science of the whole
of beings as such in their wholeness. “Physics” and “ethics” we can
understand; but how is a “science of speaking” supposed to fit in with
those two? Physics and ethics are disciplines that deal with two dis-
tinctive, universal realms of beings: the world and human beings. But
how does a science that deals with so specific a matter as speaking get
lined up with them? Why exactly should “speaking” become the sub-
ject of a universal (i.e., a philosophical) reflection? We will under-
stand why once we have a natural and unbiased understanding of
what is meant by Adyoc or “speech,” just as we do of those other two
realms of beings: the world and human beings.

We understand speaking not in the narrow and specialized sense of
“giving a speech,” but simply as “speaking to each other” for the sake
of interacting and working with each other. Talking to each other in
this way means speaking about what’s going on, what could go on,
and how to do things. It means discussing plans, projects, relation-
ships, events, the ups and downs of life. To go back to what we said
before: it means discussing how the world is and how human beings
are. Speaking with each other is not something that goes on all the
time, but speech itself—Aodyoc—is always operative—whether we're
repeating what others have said, or telling stories, or even just silently
speaking to ourselves or explaining things to ourselves or taking re-
sponsibility for ourselves. In this broad and natural sense, speech is a
way that human beings behave, one that reveals to a natural, pre-sci-
entific view what the difference is between human beings and other
living things in the world. The specific being of humans is rendered
conspicuous by speech. And [3] what is essential about speaking is
that it is experienced as speaking to others about something.

Not only is speaking to others and to oneself the behavior that makes
human beings stand out as human; speaking is also the way that hu-

2. [Moser (p. 2.30-3.5) records that Heidegger said at this point that human
beings “are experienced insofar as they act, indeed act upon others and upon
themselves.” Here, in émtotyN NOuc, “human beings are understood as beings
that, so to speak, take their ownmost being in hand.” ]
§1. The meaning of the word “logic” 3
mans direct and guide all their other kinds of behavior. It is in and
through speaking that the modes and the objects of human action are
disclosed, explained, and determined. Human behavior and human
being first become conspicuous in and through speaking, and so in their
early, pre-scientific characterization of human being, the Greeks de-
fined human being as Cwov Adyov éxov—the living being that can speak
and that co-defines its being in and through such speaking.

It is clear, then, that speaking is not something incidental but an
entirely distinctive and universal state of affairs, a form of behavior
whereby humans give direction to their being and bring their world
into discussion. Talking, therefore, is human being’s distinctive, uni-
versal, and fundamental way of comporting itself toward the world
and toward itself.

Adéyoc, then, is what reveals an ontological connection between the
other two universal regions we mentioned: human being ()90c) and
world (d@votc). So the regions that these three words designate provide
us with an essential (if rough) classification of beings. Correspond-
ingly the three disciplines of physics, ethics, and logic do not come
together by chance. Rather, this threefold division and articulation is
essential, and by means of it the three disciplines deal with the en-
tirety of all beings. The basic topic of philosophy is the whole of beings;
and these three disciples present us with a division of philosophical
labor that we must hold to as entirely natural.

In the development of the sciences, such divisions usually come later,
after the original and basic investigations have first been carried out in
each of the areas. The same goes for the names of these disciplines. Usu-
ally the names get set only when the divisions get established. [4]

According to Sextus Empiricus,* * Xenocrates was supposedly the
first to make this division explicit. It had been already current among
the Stoics, whence it passed over into Hellenistic school philosophy.

évteAéotEQov dé... Ol ELTOVTES THS PiACDOdias TO HEV TL Etvat PUGUKOV, TO

dé NOUcdv, TO dé AOYUKOV? Hv SuvauEt Lev TAatwv éotiv aoxnyos, Teel

TOAAWY LEV PVOK@Y, TEQL TOAAW@Y dé NOLK@V, OVK CALYwv dé AoyUK@v

dtarexXGelc: ‘ENTOTATA dé Ol TEQL TOV HEVOKOATHV Kat OL ATO TOV TleQutatov,

3. Sextus Empiricus, Iledcg paOnuatucovcs (Against the Mathematicians). The
work deals with later skepticism, ca. 200 cz. Still valuable on skepticism is Paul
Natorp, Forschungen zur Geschichte des Erkenntnisproblems im Altertum. Protagoras,
Demokrit, Epikur, und die Skepsis (Berlin: W. Hertz, 1884).

4. [Of the eight books of Sextus Empiricus’ lg0¢ pabnuatucovc, the last two,
books 7 and 8, are sometimes treated as books 1 and 2 of Sextus’ Hoc Aoyucovc
(Against the Logicians). This is the case in R. G. Bury’s bilingual edition, Sextus
Empiricus. The translation above, as elsewhere in this volume, follows Heidegger’s
German translation of the Greek.]
4 Introduction

ETL OE OL ATLO TIS OTOAS EXOVTAL THOSE TIS SLtatEégewe. (Adversus mathemati-

cos VII, 16)°

Those who have divided philosophy in a more complete way are those who

say that one part of philosophy deals with dvotc, another part with noc,

and a third with Adyoc. Plato first pointed the way to this possible division
of philosophy insofar as in his philosophy he treats of many things that

deal with the world, many things that concern human being, and quite a

lot about what pertains to speaking. But it was the disciples of Xenocrates

and the students of Aristotle who most explicitly divided philosophy this
way. The Stoics, too, still hold to this division.°®

Kant still liked to invoke this threefold division, the way he does in
the Preface to his Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals:

Ancient Greek philosophy was divided into three sciences: physics, ethics,

and /ogic. This division is perfectly suitable to the nature of the subject, and

there is no need to improve upon it except, perhaps, to add its principle,
partly so as to ensure its completeness [5] and partly so as to be able to
determine correctly the necessary subdivisions.’

Note that Kant emphasizes the appropriateness of this division to the
subject matter: i.e., it is a division that ultimately comes to the fore,
more or less clearly, in every philosophical investigation. And when
Kant says that one needs “only” to add the principle, we should bear in
mind that the task of doing so continues to be one of philosophy’s fun-
damental concerns, one that has not been answered to this day and,
when you get right down to it, hasn’t even been clearly posed either as
a project or as a question.

The preliminary clarification of the meaning of the word “logic” led
to a preliminary orientation to a fundamental division of the philosoph-
ical disciplines. It also provided a first view of the regions of being to
which this division and indeed the whole of philosophy are directed.

5. Xenocrates (396-314 Bck) was roughly a contemporary of Aristotle, and a
follower of Speusippos, the first leader of the Academy after Plato. He catalogued
and systematized Platonic philosophy in a scholastic way, taking studies that once
were lived and putting them into the fixed form of a wisdom that could be
taught.

6. Cf. Diogenes Laertius: ths PtAocodtac 6 Adyocg TEDTEQOV LEV TV LOVOELOT]|C
w<s 0 dvotkdc, deUTEQov dé LHKEATHS TEDTEONKE TOV NOLKOV, TEitoV dé TIAATwWv
TOV SLAAEKTLKOV, Kal EtTEAEOLOVEYNOE TIV PiAocdodiay (IIL 34). [“At first philo-
sophical discourse was of one kind: the discussion of nature. In the second in-
stance Socrates added the discussion of ethics, and thirdly Plato added dialectics,
thereby completing (the contours of) philosophy.” |

7. [GM, p. 387 / tr. 1.]
§2. The subject matter of “logic” 5
The division and the status attributed to logic as a discipline come
about later than the issue they deal with—and the same goes for the
emergence of the word Aoyut). For example, we find n Aoyucn in Cicero,®
in Alexander of Aphrodisias’ (ca. 200 c.z.), in Galen.’° It does not yet
show up in Aristotle, although the word Aoyukwe does. By clarifying
the meaning of the word Adyoc, we have already indicated the arena
that is the topic of logic: speech in the broadest sense. We will now pur-
sue that indication so that as we move toward a concept of the word, we

may also get an initial concept of the subject matter.

§2. A first indication of the concept of
the subject matter of “logic”

If we desire a more vital concept of “logic,” we have to ask a more pene-
trating question: What is the subject matter of the science of logic? In
doing so, we leave aside any consideration of logic as one discipline
among others—viz., the science of speaking and therefore of language —
and focus instead on what it is about. [6] That might seem to imply that
the proper science of Adyoc would be linguistics or the study of gram-
mar in the broad sense. In fact, even among the Greeks logic developed
in connection with grammar understood as the study of language. More
precisely, logicand grammar—the two disciplines that deal with A6yoc—
were not originally distinct. In fact, they were so indistinct that the
Greeks lacked a word for what we call “language.” That is, in the first
stage of understanding Adyoc, there was no distinction between Adyoc
as the act of speaking and Adyoc as language. The word for “speaking”
subsumed what we call “language.” On the other hand, [speaking as]
making verbal sounds was the most direct way that “language” was ex-

8. [Cicero uses Aoyucn at De finibus bonorum et malorum I, 7, 22 (“iam in altera
philosophiae parte quae est quaerendi ac disserendi, quae Aoyucn dicitur”), and at
De fatol, 1 (“Explicandaque vis est ratioque enuntiationum, quae Graeci a€wwpata
[i.e., ‘logical propositions’] vocant; totaque est Aoyucr), quam ‘rationem disser-
endi’ voco”). See Cicero, De Fato, in De Oratore, trans. H. Rackham (London: Wil-
liam Heinemann / Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1960), vol. 2, p.
192. Also see Carl Prantl, Geschichte der Logik im Abendlande, 4 vols. (Leipzig, 1855-
1870; reissued Leipzig: Gustav Fock, 1927 / Graz: Akademische Druck, 1955), vol.
1, pp. 535, 514 n. 27.]

9. [Alexander of Aphrodisias, In Aristotelis Analyticorum Priorum Librum I Com-
mentarium, ed. Maximilian Wallies, Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca (Berlin: Rei-
mer, 1883), vol. 2, p. 1 (the opening sentence of his commentary): 7 Aoyucr te
ovAAoYtotUKTY, TEAYUATELA 1] VOV TIQOKEIWEVN: “Logic or syllogistics is the study
that now lies before us.” ]

10. Cf. Carl Prantl, Geschichte der Logik im Abendlanae, vol. 1, p. 533 n. 7.
6 Introduction

perientially accessible to the Greeks. That is why they first came to un-
derstand “language” with regard to the differences between the various
forms of words and between the different possible ways words can be
brought together [in a sentence]. But the Greeks likewise, and just as
basically, understood that Adyoc consists in speaking about something,
speaking of something. That is, they saw that the basic achievement of
speech consists in showing or revealing what one is speaking about, what
one is discussing. Indeed, making vocal sounds was quite secondary to
that."

In such acts of revealing, whatever one is speaking about shows up,
becomes perceivable, and, as something perceived, gets defined in and by
the discussion about it. This revelatory defining of what is experienced
and perceived is the very same thing that we generally call “thought”
and “reflection.”

In summary: in our primary, natural experience of how human
beings live together with each other, we understand speech as the re-
vealing of something by speaking about it, and as a thinking that de-
termines and orders it. Language, speaking, thinking: they coincide as
the human way of being. They are the way we reveal and illumine
(both for ourselves and for others) the world and our own human ex-
istence [Dasein], so that in this luminosity we gain sight: human in-
sight into ourselves and an outlook on, and a practical insight into, the
world. Logic as the science of speaking, studies speech in terms of
what it properly is: the revealing of something. The subject matter of
logic is speech viewed with regard to its basic meaning, namely, allow-
ing the world, human existence, and things in general to be seen. [7]

The fact that existence has and understands and strives for this
basic form of revealing implies that, for the most part, much of the
world stands in need of “revelation,” of being un-covered and made
known. In other words, much of the world and much of human exis-
tence is by and large not un-covered. So beings can be drawn out of
their not-un-covered-ness, their hiddenness. They can be un-covered
or un-hidden. This uncoveredness or unhiddenness of beings is what
we call truth.'?

* *k *
Logic investigates speaking—the thinking that defines things—inas-
much as speaking uncovers things. The topic of logic is speech, specifi-
cally with regard to truth.

In other words, to the degree that we clarify the meaning of truth,
we will be in a position to properly understand speech, Adyoc. The

11. [From Moser (p. 11), fleshing out GA 21, p. 6.17.]

12. [Here Heidegger ends his first lecture, Thursday, 5 November 1925.]
§2. The subject matter of “logic” 7
basic topic of the science of Adyoc is truth in the quite general sense of
the questions, “What is truth in general?” or “What constitutes the
structure and make-up of truth?” and “What possibilities and forms
does truth have?” and finally, “What is the basis on which rests what
we properly call truth?”

Our definition of logic as the science of truth could be misunder-
stood. One might object that every science deals with truth, that truth
is what all scientific knowledge is after. Yes, except that there is a mis-
leading ambiguity here in how the word truth is being used. In a strict
sense, no individual science other than logic deals with truth. The
[natural] sciences, on the other hand, deal only and always with the
true, i.e., what-is-true; and they do so within the arena of the knowl-
edge of nature. Or outside of the [natural] sciences, one inquires into
what-is-true for human action, or about the true that faith gives.

But logic does not ask about the what-is-true in just any sense.
Rather, it inquires primarily and properly into the truth of [8] what-is-
true. It asks: What makes this or that true thing be true in a given
case? and what makes it be this true thing? The only way to make any
grounded sense out of the truth of theoretical-scientific knowledge,
practical reflection, or religious truth is to get to the foundation that
lets us understand what truth means at all. Only from that foundation
can we decide which kind of truth is most original, and whether the
ideal of truth is to be found in theoretical-scientific truth or practical
insight or religious faith. In other words, it is not easily decided which
form of the true is primary and most basic. Even in today’s philosophy,
this question has not yet been settled.

Of course the philosophical tradition and philosophical research
have, from their inception, always been oriented to a certain kind of
knowledge and truth, namely, theoretical cognition. The truth of the
theoretical proposition, the statement, has become the privileged par-
adigm for the true as regards its truth. One specific form of truth be-
came the ideal, and whenever one reflected on the meaning of practi-
cal or religious truth, that reflection was always carried out in a
framework that kept theoretical-scientific knowledge strictly separate
from practical knowledge, which was thought to be a more limited
and less rigorous form of cognition. In modern philosophy, the ideal of
theoretical truth carried the day in a hyperbolic form inasmuch as the
ideal of truth was not just theoretical truth in general but the truth-
character of a very specific kind of theoretical cognition: mathemati-
cal knowledge. Mathematical knowledge was seen as the proper and
most rigorous kind of knowledge. This ideal was so dominant that
even until recently one was still trying to assimilate the science of his-
tory to the ideal of mathematical knowledge. Even when [9] one does
not expressly articulate this ideal and adhere to it as such, nonethe-
8 Introduction
less, thanks to the influence of modern philosophy, that ideal contin-
ues to have a strong impact on the question of the essence of truth.

Thus, among the various meanings of the word truth, the real pri-
ority goes to the sense of truth that is oriented to propositional state-
ments. In order to first get some (in fact, very extrinsic) clarity on this
ambiguous word “truth,” let me mention some of its meanings by sim-
ply listing them at this point without going into the relevant explana-
tions of what they mean.

In the first place, truth is understood to be a feature of statements
about things. Truth is thus a property of propositions, by virtue of
which they express something just as it is.

Secondly, however, truth is understood not simply as a property of
propositions and statements. We also call the statement itself a truth,
as when we say: “’Two plus two equals four’ is a truth,” or “There are
many truths” (i.e., many [true] propositions and statements), or when
we speak of eternal and temporal truths or of absolute and relative
truths. In all these cases, truth is not just a property of propositions
but is the propositions themselves.

Thirdly, truth means the same as knowledge of a truth, as when we
say, “So-in-so cannot bear the truth.” That means that so-in-so resists
knowledge of the truth, hides from it.

Fourthly, we also use the word truth to mean an aggregate of true
propositions about a state of affairs. When we say, “We want to learn
the truth about this or that event,” this refers to the collection of possi-
ble statements that must be made if we are to have access to the event
just the way it happened, and, if we may say so, just the way it is. [10]

Fifthly, truth also has the sense of “the true,” where “the true”
means the real, just as it is. When we speak of “true gold,” we mean
real, genuine gold. The same goes for speaking of the “true God.” In
these cases, our statements are not focused on the mere things we are
speaking about, so that the statement would be true by simply ex-
pressing how things are out there. It’s quite the reverse. In these cases
a thing is properly called “true” only when it is in such a way as to
correspond to its “idea.” When something is what it should be according
to the idea of that thing, only then can we say, for example, it is “true
gold” and not “sham gold,” mere fool’s gold.

Pulling these different senses of truth together, we see a formal
structure that recurs in all of them. In the first four cases, the state-
ment is true when it speaks of the thing just as the thing is. But in the
fifth case—“true” in the sense of “real”—it is the reverse. The thing is
true when it is just as it is according to its idea, the essence of the thing
as apprehended by reason (vovc or even Adyoc). In this latter case,
genuine gold is what corresponds to the idea of gold. In both cases,
however, truth has the formal structure of just-as or as-so.
§2. The subject matter of “logic” 9

The name we give this whole formal structure of just-as is “corre-
spondence” or in Latin, adaequatio. For now let us be satisfied with this
preliminary determination of the formal structure of the true. Later
we will have to deal more deeply with the question of this remarkable
structure of just-as: what its source is, how it is possible as such—in a
word, the ground on which truth as such rests.

From what we have said, it is clear that from the very beginning,
philosophical reflection took Adyoc (speech) primarily as expressed
speech; and within that, it took Adyoc in what appeared to be its sim-
plest manifestation: the statement, where “uttering” and speaking take
the linguistic form of sentences in the form of statements such as, “The
sky is blue.” [11]

The more this form of speech obviously presents the most basic
form of theoretical-scientific knowledge, the more it imposes itself on
logical reflection. Any definitive study formulates its conclusions in
propositions, especially insofar as they are statements about the world.
Formulated as simple “propositions,” statements about the world that
reflect on and determine the world, came to be the simplest, most
general, and likewise the most basic form of speech. Even the deter-
mination of truth now gets oriented, primarily and in principle, to this
kind of speech, the propositional statement. The act of un-covering
things in statements is what is true, and so the truth of theoretical-
scientific knowledge has become the basic, original form of truth as
such. The truth of [propositional] knowledge attains a universal pri-
macy. To the degree that any other forms of truth enter the field of
reflection, they are measured against the standard of the truth of
[propositional] cognition and are understood as derived from it, as
modifications of it.

It is far from evident, however, that theoretical-cognitive truth, or
even the truth of statements, is the basic form of truth in general. Phi-
losophy’s first determination of truth, and the tradition of logic that
follows from it, are oriented in terms of this idea of truth; but so too is
linguistic usage, which is bound up with them in a certain way. So in
its decisive origins logic was already oriented toward this truth of the-
oretical apprehension and cognitive determination. From that point
until now, this orientation of logic and philosophy has remained fun-
damentally in place.

We will see that this primacy of theoretical truth within logical inves-
tigation is not accidental. But we must also make it clear that understand-
ing the project of logic and questioning it more radically requires that we
go back to this naive beginning of logic and shake it to its roots. In other
words, it is far from settled which kind of “true”—the theoretical or the
practical—is original and authentic. Instead, the question about [12] the
originally and authentically “true”—i.e., the question of the primary
10 Introduction
being of truth—is logic’s most basic concern, but only when logic has the
will to be a searching, scientific logic—a logic that philosophizes.

§3. A philosophizing logic and traditional scholastic logic
But if logic is, by definition, a discipline within philosophy, is there re-
ally any kind of logic other than philosophical logic? There certainly is.
The kind of logic that is and was commonly taught in the universities of
today and of yesteryear is a logic that has given up on any kind of phi-
losophy, that is, any kind of serious questioning and investigation. This
so-called “scholastic logic” is not philosophy, and it is not any one of the
particular sciences. It is a form of sloth, kept alive by custom and by off-
the-record academic arrangements and desires. It is also a fraud.

Scholastic logic is a form of sloth tailor-made for instructors. All they
have to do, year after year, is parrot the same old stock of unchanging,
shopworn propositions, formulas, rules, and definitions. Variations in
how these logic courses are taught is confined to how the teacher pack-
ages it, how thorough he is, and what kind of examples he chooses. In
this kind of “logic,” the logician never runs a risk, never has to put up or
shut up—which is the price that you have to pay to do real philosophy.

It is a fraud perpetrated on the students. They are trapped for a
whole semester studying stuff of utterly dubious value. It would be
easier and more expeditious for them—not to mention quicker and
cheaper—to just read the stuff on their own in any logic manual.

This kind of scholastic logic can certainly appeal to a long tradition of
teaching that reaches back through the Middle Ages [13] to the time
when logic was originally established as a discipline (see above). But
even the most ancient of traditions cannot claim its own legitimacy
when it began as a result of a decline, or better, began as a decline.

Traditional scholastic logic comes from a period when philosophy
had already lost its character as a productive force. The fact that later,
creative philosophers have since taken this logic under their wings
changes nothing basic. Traditional scholastic logic retains the content
(but trivialized, uprooted, and mummified) of an original philosophi-
cal questioning that was alive in Plato and Aristotle but got completely
stifled and rigidified by the schools.

The endless retailing of this over-the-counter stock of scholastic
logic is an outrage to real philosophizing. It is beneath the dignity of
the university as a place of questioning and searching.

Our decision for a philosophizing logic, our repudiation of the col-
legium logicum in its traditional form, is neither some rash rejection of
the tradition, nor is it a supercilious disdain for solid learning, for get-
ting an academic position, and even less so for the university. Quite
§3. A philosophizing logic 1]
the contrary, we should prepare ourselves to retrieve the genuine tra-
dition from out of the ruins of the sham, to really appropriate the
productive and living elements that lie under the rubble of scholastic
logic. But we will engage in direct confrontation with that earlier phi-
losophizing logic only if we ourselves do logic in a philosophizing
manner. The result will be to see that Aristotle’s logic, for example—or
more precisely, his work on that area of research—is quite different
from the scholastic logic that likes to appeal to him.

In his lecture course Logic, Kant says:
Contemporary logic is a descendant of Aristotle’s Analytic. This philosopher can
be regarded as the father of logic. [14] He expounded it as an organon and
divided it into analytic and dialectic. His manner of teaching is very scholastic
and has to do with the development of the most universal concepts, which lie
at the basis of logic, but no one has any use for it because almost everything
amounts to mere subtleties, except that one [has] drawn from this the names
for various acts of the understanding. From Aristotle’s time on, logic has not
gained much in content, by the way, nor can it by its nature do so.

Compare the Preface to the second edition of his Critique of Pure Reason:
We can see that from the earliest times Jogic has traveled this secure course
from the fact that since the time of Aristotle it has not had to go a single
step backwards unless we count the abolishing of a few unnecessary sub-
tleties or the more distinct determination of its presentations. These im-
provements pertain more to the elegance of that science than to its secu-
rity. (B viii)

When Kant wrote or spoke those lines from the Logic, he knew
nothing of Hegel and of the logic that he was already composing,
which would eventually make Hegel what he became and will ever
remain: the only-begotten and co-equal son of the Father of Logic. In
philosophical terms this means that the philosophical logic founded
by Aristotle and completed by Hegel will not be advanced by any fur-
ther son-ship and uncle-hood. In order to advance philosophically, it
needs a new lineage. When that will come about, no one knows. We
of today are certainly not it. But the positive contribution to be made
by those few who now understand what is at stake will consist in a
work of transition: bringing to life again the productivity of the past
and taking it into a future that we dimly see but are not yet up to.
That’s why it’s all the more urgent that we carry through with ques-
tioning, and free ourselves from the chains of rigidity.

But is it in fact true that the cultivation of traditional scholastic logic
really promotes only a cult of tradition and a dependence on custom?
12 Introduction

Wasn't there some essential usefulness to it? I don’t want to dodge the
major reason people give for maintaining and encouraging this logic.
People say and think and believe, in an agreement that goes without
saying, that [15] studying scholastic logic teaches you how to think
and helps you reach a higher level of learning and a greater exactitude
in thinking. So it’s something we should strive for right from the be-
ginning of our scientific studies.

This is a basic misunderstanding. Thinking, and especially scien-
tific thinking, can be learned only by getting involved with the subject
matter. It would be the greatest mistake to think that a collegium logi-
cum could make up for a lack of methodical, conceptual hard work in
a science or the communication of that work through teaching.

The objectivity of scientific questioning and the precision of con-
ceptual definition grow out of an increasing familiarity with the area
of a given science’s subject matter. What is more, such familiarity is
possible in a positive sense only when an individual, at the core of his
or her human existence, has gained a basic relationship to this subject
matter, whether by an inner choice and decisive struggle or by an un-
explainable inner calling.

This holds not only for theoretical scientific thinking but also for
the field of practical undertakings and political power, where scholas-
tic logic has nothing to say. It even misleads when it turns into mere
drill and blind learning, and especially when it becomes a hair-split-
ting and empty form of arguing, cut off from the subject matter.

Conversely, understanding what scholastic logic has to offer presup-
poses a very comprehensive and well-developed philosophical think-
ing, especially when this logic is simply presumed, apparently naively,
instead of going back into the vital origins of its settled formulae and
theorems.

It’s a fool’s errand to expect that traditional logic will teach us how
to think. But on the other hand we certainly can clarify scientific
work and academic study—in a word, the whole form of existence that
they encompass—but only by way of a philosophizing [16] logic, that
is to say, only through a living and effective connection with the con-
crete practice of a given science.’?

* * *
Transparency in one’s scientific comportment and one’s scientific life
means having a relationship of understanding with the whole of a sci-
ence and its basic components and their interconnections. For now let
us simply note those components in a list:

13. [Here ends Heidegger’s lecture of 6 November 1925.]
§3. A philosophizing logic 13

1. The subject matter of the science.

2. The world: generally speaking, the things from out of which the
subject matter is selected.

3. The basic way in which the selection is made.

4. The relation to the world in which the science’s subject matter is
rooted.

5. The viewpoint that guides one’s inquiry into the subject matter.

6. The kind of apodictic insight, expressible in propositions, that is to
be attained.

7. The relevant ways of forming concepts. (There are structural differ-
ences between the exact concepts of physics, the morphological con-
cepts of botany, and the historical concepts of philology.)

8. The manner in which proofs are communicated.

9. The sense of the validity of the binding “propositions” gained in the
particular sciences.

All these components get modified according to the different sciences

and groups of sciences.

Clarity in research is not attained simply by being aware that these
basic components are present in a science. It is had, rather, when these
elements spring to life, so to speak, in concrete occasions of our scien-
tific work in such a way that the path of our work of research and as-
similation is suddenly lit up and leads us forward or becomes problem-
atic and unsure.

A science does not develop because some scholar discovers some-
thing new in a specific situation. Rather, in each case the sudden jolt by
which any given science moves forward [17] consists of a revision of
basic concepts. From then on, a science develops by taking the hereto-
fore available stock of propositions and concepts and putting them on a
new foundation. Einstein’s revolution in contemporary physics was car-
ried out in this way. It’s not the case that he began to philosophize about
basic concepts of physics. Rather, in working on specific problems he
looked into the basic concepts contained in those problems and saw that
if he was to remain at all committed to the goal of physics, a revision of
those concepts was needed. It is hard to see it so clearly today, but an
analogous revolution was Dilthey’s achievement in the science of his-
tory, namely, the shift of historical research to what we now call the
history of human spirit. Scholars up to the present, at least in their con-
crete work, still have not understood this achievement—which shows
that a paradigm shift within this field is more difficult to carry out,
whereas the siren song of dilettantism is easier to follow.

Understanding the nine points listed above is the source of trans-
parency in the life of science. Those points are not just thrown to-
gether. They are understood from out of a primary pre-understanding
14 Introduction

of the current whole of the sciences. The basic structure of that whole
is the possible “truth” within which any research activity operates. In
other words, the constitutive elements themselves are only necessary
structural moments of theoretical truth. Thus they can be understood
and are to be appropriated from out of the pre-understanding of theo-
retical truth and ultimately of truth in general. This means that clarity
in scientific research is possible only by way of a philosophizing log-
ic.'* Scholastic logic never delivers on its claim to teach us how to
think. On the other hand, what is basically meant by that claim—viz.,
of the transparency of scientific research—can be fulfilled only by a
philosophizing logic. To be sure, [18] that last sentence is spoken from
the viewpoint of the ideal. Trying to promise that the following “logic”
will concretely achieve anything like that would be not only presump-
tuous but also a misunderstanding of philosophy. Really very little can
be said about philosophy. Instead of giving an extended explanation of
its essence, I will merely allude to one thing that pertains to philoso-
phy: the fact that the philosopher reserves to himself the possibility of
making mistakes. The courage to err does not mean just the courage
to put up with one’s errors. It means much more: the courage to admit
one’s errors. It is courage for the inner release of one’s own self in
order to listen and learn, the courage for positive discussion.

Not only in the realm of scientific research but in every possible kind of exis-
tence, individuals are only what they are able—and have the courage—to de-
mand of themselves.

The rejection of traditional scholastic logic can be easily combined
with true esteem for the tradition. To esteem the tradition does not
mean remaining blindly bound to what-has-been as such—the past as
such—or stubbornly refusing to go beyond the handed-down tradition
as handed down. True esteem for the tradition is grounded in the his-
toricity of human existence itself, that is, in the original fidelity of
human existence to itself. Fidelity means getting close to and holding
on to that which is seized and won by struggle and that holds our ex-
istence in suspense.

Within the circle of tasks reserved to philosophizing logic, the central
concern—which will get clearer later on—is the question, “What is
truth?” We really have to ask this question. Philosophizing logic con-
sists in the searching passage through this question. It is the only way
we gain the possibility of understanding from the roots up former attempts
to ask this question about truth. Only from those roots can we under-
stand the process whereby this question dried up and died out in scho-
lastic teaching. Consequently, the aforementioned rejection of tradi-
tional scholastic logic is nothing [19] other than the movement toward

14. Not to be confused with the theory of science [ Wissenschaftstheorie] .
§4. The possibility and the being of truth 15
the philosophical appropriation of the genuine philosophical content
that is locked up inside that logic.

§4. The possibility and the being of truth in general.
Skepticism
When we assign philosophizing logic the fundamental task of really
asking the question, “What is truth?” it might seem that we are giving
only a preliminary formulation of the problem and that logic is not yet
being put on the genuine road to originality.

The question to be asked before all others has to be: Does it make
any sense to ask about truth? Is not the very idea of truth an illusion?
“Ts” there truth at all?—in other words, is there something whereby
things are given just as they are? And we could even ask the further
question: Are there things at all? And then we would end up with a
whole series of questions that the ancient skeptics have already
asked.

Compare Gorgias, as described by Sextus Empiricus:

EV VAQ TH ETLYEADOLEVW TLEQL TOD U1] OVTOS T} TEL PUVGEWS TELA KATA TO

EENS KEPAAALA KATAOKEVACEL EV HEV KAL TIOWTOV OTLOVdEV EOTLV, SEUTEQOV

OTL El KAL EOTLV, AKATAANTITOV AVOQEWTI, TEITOV OTL El KAL KATAANTTOV,

aAAQ Tol ye AVEEOLOTOV Kat AVEQUTVEVTOV TED TEAAC. (Adversus mathemati-

cos VII, 65)

In his book On Non-being or On Nature, Gorgias discusses three major theses

in succession: first, that there is nothing; second, that if there is something,

it cannot be apprehended by human beings; and third, that even if it can be
grasped, it still cannot be expressed and made intelligible to others.

Before the question of what truth is, there comes the question of
whether it is at all. Before sketching out what it is, we have to prove that
it is. Against this position, we may propose this formal argument: fo-
cusing on and discussing the question whether there is truth at all
implies that we already have some understanding of truth. We [20]
must somehow know what a thing is if we are to decide its being or
non-being.

So, even if it should turn out that there is no truth and that it can-
not be understood and communicated, we still have to clarify what we
mean by “truth.”

In fact, precisely because this thesis is supposed to be held as a fun-
damental proposition, the content of the thesis as well as the meaning
of “truth” must have the transparency of a principle. But that implies
16 Introduction
that the explanation of what truth is comes before the question of
whether it can be apprehended and communicated.

But with regard to the very question of whether there is truth, we
would choose to say that the obvious answer is “yes.” And then when
we explain what truth is, we already presuppose that it is possible to
make true statements about the essence of truth. The intention to
discuss something presupposes the prospect and intention of clarify-
ing it.

Basically, then, the question of whether there is any truth at all is
already answered by the fact that we are discussing it. And (so one
says) we answer the question [“Is there any truth?”] in the affirma-
tive even when we deny that there is truth, insofar as the denial claims
to be a true statement about the non-existence of truth. The denial of
the existence of truth affirms the truth of the denial, and therefore the
existence of truth. The positing of such a denial, which we usually call
skepticism, contradicts itself and therefore is impossible.

So the outcome is: (a) The question that seems to be primary—
whether there is truth at all—is not at all the first question. (b) In fact
that question is not even the topic for a meaningful discussion insofar
as it always presupposes the possibility of truth. At best, we can clarify
in an explicit way the necessity of this presupposition. We might say
that this task is the prolegomenon for any and all logic. [21]

There are no further grounds for asking an intelligent question that
could get behind this basic presupposition that there is truth after all.
Reflection has here reached a limit.

At this limit of reflection and discussion, the assurance that truth
exists seems almost to be self-guaranteed. The possibility that skepti-
cism could endanger the existence of truth is neutralized as soon as we
realize that the skeptic refutes himself and cancels himself out, puts
himself out of business as an alternative position.

But a refutation of skepticism is a refutation of every kind of relativ-
ism, every statement that there is no absolutely valid truth. For even the
statement that there is only relative truth—if it is made in earnest—is
self-contradictory. The statement says that it is absolutely the case that
there is only relative truth. So there is at least one absolute truth. Conse-
quently, the thesis itself is undermined, the position is untenable. So the
situation is this: The question “What is truth?” is the basic question (1)
because even the question of whether there is truth already presupposes
the concept of truth, and (2) because likewise this question answers it-
self even before it is asked.

But the last reason we gave is ultimately not sustainable, because
precisely when we formulate the question of a philosophizing logic,
we have to doubt whether the problem of skepticism can be dismissed
as cheaply and easily as that; whether it makes any sense to refute
§4. The possibility and the being of truth 17
skepticism; and whether skepticism can be captured in such a simple
formula.

Maybe skepticism is only a construction of its opponents who want
to refute it in order to get a sense of security by refuting it.

On closer inspection, we see that both this skepticism and the refu-
tation of it presuppose a very specific concept of truth; that this con-
cept is not at all the original one; and therefore that this refutation is
[22] not a radical consideration at all but only the semblance of a self-
evident presupposition, only the mirage of a limit.

To be sure, the question “What is truth?” is the basic question—not,
however, because it maintains that the problem of skepticism is al-
ready solved from the beginning. Rather, the problem of skepticism
belongs in an essential way among the set of questions about the con-
dition of the possibility of truth at all. But then there is a multitude of
things to be discussed.”

* * *

1. One needs to demonstrate that this supposedly fundamental con-
sideration—the refutation of skepticism—still does not and cannot
deal with the real, genuine presuppositions. That is because both
sides—the skeptic and his refuter—presume that the truth, whose
being and non-being they are debating, is propositional truth. This is
especially clear in the one who would refute skepticism. To confound
the skeptic, he appeals to the principle of non-contradiction: there can
be no truth where there is contradiction, especially the self-contradic-
tion we find in the assertion of skepticism. But contradiction and non-
contradiction make sense as a criterion only where this criterion is
applied to “diction,” to speaking back and forth, i.e., to Adyoc, a state-
ment in the sense of a proposition. Ultimately, the refutation is cen-
tered on the thesis that in every true statement, so one says, the exis-
tence of truth is co-affirmed. There the refutation rests its case.

It doesn’t even go so far as at least to show why (i.e., on what basis)
it must be the case that the existence of truth is co-affirmed in every
true statement. It presumes the matter is self-evident. It never asks,
much less answers, that question, and therefore this supposedly fun-
damental consideration that wants to get to ultimate presuppositions
is not fundamental at all. [23]

2. This supposedly fundamental consideration makes an appeal to
the principle of contradiction as a criterion, and therefore an appeal to
fundamental proof and provability. But what does proof mean? What
is the origin of the claim to prove? What is the condition of the possi-
bility of proof at all? What is the origin of the “why?” —not to mention

15. [Here Heidegger ends his lecture of 9 November 1925.]
18 Introduction
the “therefore”! And where does the necessity of unprovability find its
basis?

3. The principle of contradiction and the principle of identity are
presupposed to be self-evident, with no questions asked about whether
they are actually ultimate. I don’t mean to say these principles should
be reducible to simpler ones. However, we should at least entertain the
question of whether or not the “proposition” of contradiction is simply
a specific and determinate “expression” for an original basic relation
that does not primarily lie in the dimension of statements and propo-
sitions. Hence, appealing to this proposition—even apart from the fact
that the appeal leads us into the dimension of the theoretical state-
ment—does not as such touch on the real presuppositions of truth in
general.!°

4. In both the argumentation for and the refutation of skepticism, the
issue is whether or not there is truth, whether or not it exists. But what
goes unasked in all this is what the being of truth means, what the
“there is...” refers to. There are automobiles, Negroes, Abelian func-
tions, Bach’s fugues. “Are there” truths, too? Or if not, what then?

5. This delineation of skepticism and of the refutation of skepticism
claims to deal with the ultimate presuppositions of all philosophy—
but without asking about the meaning and necessity and possibility of
presupposing as such. After all, where is there such a thing as presup-
posing? And why must there be? What is the basis for the necessity of
making pre-suppositions? The more noise one makes about “the self-
evident,” the more puzzles there are to solve. But to philosophize
means to be entirely and constantly [24] troubled by and immediately
sensitive to the complete enigma of things that common sense consid-
ers self-evident and unquestionable. Of course such philosophizing
requires that we hunt down and look into these “immediately self-
evident” things, and for that we need the right direction and the cru-
cial light for finding our way.

This list of questions should make it clear that the supposedly basic
reflection [on skepticism] is only a semblance of that. Later on, when
we again take up and investigate these questions in their proper place,
we will have to show how they are intimately connected with the
question, “What is truth?” This will show us that the question about
the essence of truth leads to a dimension that will remain completely
closed to those who orient the basic concept of truth to truth as the
validity of propositions.

Far from being a foundation-laying prolegomenon to philosophiz-
ing logic, the above discussion of skepticism and relativism is only an

16. Aristotle’s principle of contradiction is also a relation of being and a law of
being, something that has not been understood up to today.
§4. The possibility and the being of truth 19
indication of the fact that the basic question of logic has not yet reached
the dimension of philosophical questioning.

Nowadays, however, that very discussion serves as a preparation for
laying the foundations of logic. We find prolegomena to pure (philo-
sophical) logic not in the realm of scholastic logic, but precisely in the
one place where inquiry in logic is still alive in our day: in Edmund
Husserl’s Logical Investigations, published in 1900-1901, which, al-
though little enough understood, was the first book to shake up pres-
ent-day logic again and to advance its productive possibilities.!’ The
first volume of these Logical Investigations is subtitled, “Prolegomena to
Pure Logic,” which means it deals with what first has to be clarified
prior to any and all logic.

The first volume is a principled refutation of psychologism as a form
of skepticism and of relativism, followed by the positive presentation
of the idea of pure logic. If the questions we posed [25] about skepti-
cism and especially about its refutation are correct, then it follows that
even contemporary philosophical logic has not gotten down to the
real foundations. In fact its questions have not even moved in that
direction. Instead, it is constructed on something it presumes to be
self-evident: truth as the truth of propositions, truth as the validity of
statements.!®

Given what we said about transparency and about skepticism, it is
clear that the question “What is truth?” will force us into some funda-
mental reflections.

However, because this course is also supposed to be of an introduc-
tory nature, it does not start right off with a treatment of the question
“What is truth?” Instead, in part I of the course we want to get ac-
quainted with the crucial historical origins of the problem of truth in
the Western philosophy in which we ourselves stand. In so doing, we
will rely on the authentic documents of the origin of philosophical
logic, and we will glean, as it were, a collegium logicum from Aristotle

17. [Edmund Husserl, Logische Untersuchungen. Erster Theil: Prolegomena zur
reinen Logik (Logical Investigations, Part One: Prolegomena to Pure Logic) and
Zweiter Theil: Untersuchungen zur Phdnomenologie und Theorie der Erkenntnis (Part
Two: Investigations into the Phenomenology and Theory of Knowledge) (Halle:
Max Niemeyer, 1900-1901). All citations from this work will follow the pagination
of the first edition, which is the one Heidegger cites in this course. Texts of the first
and second editions have been reissued as Husserliana (The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff), vol. XVIII, ed. Elmar Holenstein (1975), and vols. XIX/1 and XIX/2, ed.
Ursula Panzer (1984). For an English edition see Logical Investigations, trans. J. N.
Findlay, 2 vols. (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul / New York: Humanities Press,
1970).]

18. [This is only one of the many critiques of Husserl that Heidegger articulated
during the Marburg years. |
20 Introduction
himself, the founder of such logic, but one freed of the incrustations
and rigidifications of a bad tradition.

That should give us a preparatory basis for working out, in part II of
the course, the question that radicalizes everything: “What is truth?”

Parts I and II are preceded by a prolegomenon in which we focus on
the formulation of the questions that Husserl’s Logical Investigations and
phenomenology have introduced into contemporary logic. After that,
we will steer the question back into the decisive beginnings. [26]

§5. Outline of the course.'’ Bibliography
What we said above indicates the basic plan of the course:
Prolegomenon. The current situation of philosophical logic. (Psychol-
ogism and the question of truth.)
Part I. The problem of truth in the decisive origin of philosophical
logic, and the seedbed of traditional logic (focused on Aristotle).

1. The theory of statement, proposition, judgment. (This in con-
nection with Aristotle’s treatise—Wwhich is more like a sketch of
this problem—regt éQunvetac, De interpretatione, On Interpretation,
the second in the collection of Aristotle’s so-called “logical writ-
ings.” Later I’ll say something about how we will carry this out.)
a. The basic structure of A6yoc and the phenomenon of mean-

ing and sense: what do they both mean?

b. The structure and the meaning of the “copula.” (In the state-
ment “This board is black,” the “is” is designated as the copula.
This particular “is” will concern us in great detail.)

c. Negating, negation, the “not” and its origin.

d. The so-called principles of identity and of contradiction.

2. The doctrines of
a. the definition or Ogtopoc, which is a specific kind of Adyoc.
b. essence, in Greek, the ti, “whatness”: how and why we ask

about the “what,” whatness—thatness. (Our treatment will
follow another Aristotelian text, avadutuca boteQa f (Poste-
rior Analytics II).

c. “proof” (the “why”) —being—“the a priori”—the problem of
“presupposition.”

19. [Editor’s note: The plan of the lectures was changed as the course un-
folded.] [Translator’s note: Nevertheless, in the present edition the table of con-
tents and text follow Heidegger’s outline of the course as it is presented here, on
the conviction that its part-headings adequately represent the trajectory of his
exposition. ]
§5. Outline of the Course 21

These questions make up part I, and by answering them we get an

understanding of the ground from which ancient logic sprang and of

what parts of it were treated in scholastic logic.

Part II. The radicalized question: What is truth?

1. The foundations of truth in general.

2. The authentic and original form of truth.

3. The possibilities of truth that are grounded in the above—the

inauthentic and the non-original essence of truth.*°

4. Philosophical truth and scientific truth. [27]

Aristotle lies at the basis of our treatment in part I. Our interpretation
will stick close to the texts, but it is not meant to go into them in great
detail. For now the point is simply to come to understand the issue.
Therefore, I will give a direct translation of the passages we are to deal
with.

The most important of the works on logic going back to the mid-
nineteenth century are:

1. John Stuart Mill, System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive: Being a
Connected View of the Principles of Evidence and the Methods of Scientific
Investigation, 1843.7!

Mill’s Logic had a very strong influence on Germany in the nine-

teenth century, but chiefly because of the opposition it provoked. It

especially had an impact on Dilthey, who vigorously opposed what
book 6 of this logic had to say about the humanities. Dilthey set his
own position of the theory of the humanities against it. That is, in
keeping with the entire orientation of his philosophy, Mill took it
upon himself to interpret in a certain sense the humanities as a kind

20. [Here is a first hint at what Heidegger will call Irre and the Un-wesen der
Wahrheit in his “Vom Wesen der Wahrheit” (GA 9, esp. pp. 193-198); see also
Pathmarks, ed. William McNeill (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998),
pp. 148-152. Heidegger’s students heard him say, not Wesen—“essence”—but
Weisen, “ways” or “modes” of truth (Moser, p. 60.9; Weiss, p. 17.32).]

21. [London: John W. Parker, 1843. Reissued in John Stuart Mill (1806-1873),
Collected Writings, 33 vols., ed. John M. Robson (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press / London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1981-1991); here, vols. 7 and 8 respec-
tively. Heidegger cites the work according to its German translation by Theodor
Gomperz, System der deductiven und inductiven Logik. Eine Darlegung der Grundsdtze
der Beweislehre und der Methoden wissenschaftlicher Forschung, in John Stuart Mill,
Gesammelte Werke, ed. Theodor Gomperz (Leipzig: Fues (R. Reisland), 1872-1873),
vols. 2-4. However, in both GA 21 (p. 27.8) and in Moser (p. 61.21), a comma is
incorrectly added after Grundsdtze, thereby changing the sense of the subtitle to:
“the principles, the theory of evidence, and...” The Weiss transcript (p. 18.6) gets
the title right. ]
22 Introduction
of natural science. This logic also influenced Husserl’s teacher, Bren-
tano. Even Husserl himself learned a good deal, both positively and
negatively, from Mill.

2. Christoph Sigwart, Logik, 2 volumes, 1873ff.?* A vast and important
work on logic, recently published in its fifth edition edited by Hans
Meier.

In the traditional fashion, the first volume treats the theory of judg-

ment, concept, and conclusion. The second volume treats the theory

of method. Sigwart takes it upon himself to bring logic into close
connection with the project of the sciences. In the second volume
he specifically pursues an orientation to the philosophy of science.

This logic has had its greatest influence on one of the contemporary

schools of philosophy: the so-called value philosophy of Windel-

band and Rickert.

3. Hermann Lotze’s Logic, published in 1874 as part 1 of his System of
Philosophy.”? It is equally as important as, and maybe even more es-
sential and relevant than, Sigwart.

It is in three books: “Of Thought,” “Of Investigation,” and “Of

Knowledge.” Philosophically speaking, the most important book is

the third. It has exercised a strong influence on the modern logic

that is usually called the logic of [28] validity, or validity logic, or
value logic. It has had an influence on Windelband and Rickert, but
likewise, in some essential elements, on Husserl. That is especially
so as regards the peculiar interpretation of the Platonic idea in book

3 of the Logic, where Lotze tries to show that the Platonic idea is not

a sensory thing but rather (to use his term) “has validity.” Already

in 1843, when he was a young teacher, he had written a logic that

was a livelier and, in my opinion, a philosophically more acute
work.** The large logic has recently been re-edited by Georg Misch

22. [Christoph Sigwart (1830-1904), Logik (Tubingen: H. Laupp, 1873-1878; 5th
edition, 1924, ed. Hans Meier). See also Christoph Sigwart, Logic, 2nd rev. edition,
2 vols., trans. Helen Dendy (London: Swan Sonnenschein / New York: Macmillan,
1895); repr. in the series Phenomenology: Background, Foreground, and Influences
(no. 12), 2 vols. (New York and London: Garland Publishing, 1980).]

23. [Hermann Lotze (1817-1881), Logik. Drei Biicher vom Denken, vom Untersu-
chen und vom Erkennen: System der Philosophie (Leipzig: S. Hirzel, 1874; 2nd edition,
1880), vol. 1. See also Hermann Lotze, System of Philosophy, Part I. Logic, in Three
Books: Of Thought, Of Investigation, and Of Knowledge, 2 vols., ed. and trans. Bernard
Bosanquet (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1884). The second edition (1888) was reis-
sued in the series Phenomenology: Background, Foreground, and Influences (no.
8), 2 vols. (New York and London: Garland Publishing, 1980).]

24. [Heidegger is referring to Lotze’s Logic (Leipzig: Weidemann, 1843).]
§5. Outline of the Course 23
in the series Philosophische Bibliothek, published by Felix Meiner
Verlag.** Misch has written a valuable introduction to this logic,
and within certain limits it is quite good on Lotze and on the whole
development of logic.

4. Wilhelm Schuppe, Erkenntnistheoretische Logik, 1878.

Lastly a work that is mostly forgotten but that nonetheless is at

a high philosophical level, Schuppe’s so-called “epistemological”

logic.?°
Among the most recent works, I would mention:
5. Alexander Pfander’s Logik.?’

This logic is influenced in an essential way by Husserl. It is elabo-

rated phenomenologically, but in such a way that holds to the

framework of traditional logic. It is, if I may put it this way, a tradi-
tional logic, phenomenologically purified. Very lucid, clearly writ-

ten, and excellent for orienting the beginner. Published in 192078

both as a separate book and in the fourth volume of the Jahrbuch fiir

Philosophie und phanomenologische Forschung.”°

* * *
6. Heinrich Rickert.

Heinrich Rickert has been influenced in an essential way by Logical

Investigations, and he first revealed the influence, reluctantly, in his

article “Zwei Wege der Erkenntnistheorie” [Two Paths of Epistemol-

ogy], Kantstudien XI (1909), which became important for his further

development. Whatever Rickert has to offer that is new with regard

to his earlier position, he essentially owes to Husserl’s investigations.
7. Emil Lask.

Within this same school, Husserl has strongly influenced Lask—

Rickert’s student, who was killed in Galicia in 1915. In 1911, Lask

25. [Published in 1912, ed. Georg Misch, as a new printing of the second edi-
tion of 1880.]

26. [Wilhelm Schuppe (1839-1913), Erkenntnistheoretische Logik (Bonn: E. Weber,
1878).]

27. [Alexander Pfander (1871-1941), Logik, in Husserl’s Jahrbuch fiir Philosophie
und phdnomenologische Forschung, vol. 9 (Halle: Max Niemeyer, 1921; 2nd rev. edi-
tion, 1929).]

28. [The actual date of publication is 1921. See Edmund Husserl, Aufsdtze und
Vortrdge (1911-1921), ed. Thomas Nenon and Hans Rainer Sepp = Husserliana XXV
(Dordrecht and Boston: Martinus Nijhoff / Kluwer, 1987), p. 67.]

29. [Here Heidegger ends his lecture of 10 November 1925.]
24 Introduction

published his Logik der Philosophie und die Kategorienlehre, which in-

corporates some of Husserl’s crucial conclusions on the problem of

categorial apprehension and categorial intuition. [29] See also his

Lehre vom Urteil, 1912.*°
8. Hans Driesch.

Also essentially influenced by phenomenology is Dreisch, in his so-

called Ordnungslehre.?!

I will not go further into the effects of Logical Investigations now. Instead,
I will describe, albeit very briefly, the genesis of this work.” [30]

30. [Both books were reprinted by the original publisher in Emil Lask, Gesam-
melte Schriften, ed. Eugen Herrigel (Tubingen: J. C. B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck),
1923).

31. [Hans Driesch (1867-1941), Ordnungslehre. Ein System des nicht-metaphysi-
chen Teiles der Philosophie. Mit besonderer Berticksichtigung der Lehre vom Werden (Jena:
Diederichs, 1912; 2nd edition, 1923).]

32. [GA 21, p. 30, is blank.]
PROLEGOMENON
a

The contemporary situation of
philosophical logic.
(Psychologism and the question of truth)
Logical Investigations grew out of efforts to provide philosophical clarity
to pure mathematics. Husserl, who originally was a mathematician,
was led to some principled considerations about the basic concepts and
laws of mathematics, and as he said, he soon realized that logic in our
day fell short of being an actual science and thus that the fundamental
resources of logical reflection lagged behind the basic concepts of the
sciences— especially in this case, of mathematics. He was faced with
the question of the specific kind of conceptuality and ways of proof, and
the significance of knowledge and truth in mathematical cognition. Fi-
nally, he came to reflect on the universal essence of mathematics, which
had become all the more complicated insofar as Cantor’s development
of a pure theory of groups had shown that authentic mathematics was
constituted not by the quantitative but by the formal and its law-giving
character. So his reflections as a whole came to be focused on the
question of the meaning of truth, and especially on the meaning of
formal truth. In the beginning, around the 1890s, Husserl tried to
carry out these philosophical reflections by means of the traditional
philosophy of his day, that is, predominantly by way of so-called psy-
chological reflections. Using a psychological analysis of mathematical
thinking, he tried to get behind the specific structure of mathematical
objectivity.

But he soon saw the principled difficulty contained in this analysis:
Granted that mathematics does not attempt to understand empirical
facts, is it even possible to establish [32] something fundamental about
this science by using psychological ideas, that is, explanations ordered
to the empirical sciences? By arguing out these basic questions, he fi-
nally came to realize that psychology has absolutely no qualification to
be the science that can aid us in discussing questions like the structure
of mathematics and of mathematical objects. Husserl’s impartial pursuit

27
28 Prolegomenon

of the guiding questions about mathematics and logic in the broadest
sense, as well as his methodological reflection on the possibilities of a
scientific solution to this question, finally led to the development of a
new kind of research that Husserl called phenomenology. Husserl did not
coin the term “phenomenology.” Rather, it is older and originated at the
time of the Enlightenment—even Kant used it now and again—and the
term became widely known through Hegel’s book, Phenomenology of
Spirit. People commonly say that contemporary phenomenology has
nothing to do with the Hegelian variety, but it is not that simple. With
the proper precautions, we can say that contemporary phenomenology
has a lot to do with Hegel—not with his Phenomenology, but with what
he called logic. With certain reservations, we can identify that logic
with contemporary phenomenological research.

I do not want to speak now about phenomenology itself, but only to
clarify briefly what we mean by it. We do not mean “phenomenology”
the way many of its disciples understand it—as a particular current in
philosophy. Likewise, it is not essential that a so-called school of phe-
nomenology exists. The crucial thing is the principle that guides the
work, one that we call phenomenological. Taken as a whole, this prin-
ciple is nothing new but is one of many issues in philosophy that go
without saying. The principle is that we should inquire into and work
upon the objects of philosophy just the way they show up. Thus, the
tendency to press on to the real issues themselves, [33] to free them
from presuppositions, overlays from the tradition, and hasty questions
laden with presumptions. This is the proper thrust of phenomenology:
to get to the real issues themselves. A “phenomenon” simply means a
given object of philosophical research insofar as it is apprehended with
the intention of understanding it as it is. Soin a certain sense the word
“phenomenon” always implies a task: negatively, protection against
presuppositions and prejudgments; positively, to assure that the anal-
ysis of so-called phenomena must get clear with itself about which
presuppositions it brings to the objects of philosophy. For ultimately
we can show that no one can do without such presupposing, and
therefore that the critique of the essential act of presupposing is an es-
sential element of philosophical research. Right now I don’t want to go
into a long methodological explanation of this. Instead, we shall pro-
ceed phenomenologically throughout this course. So when I use the
word “phenomenon,” it should be understood in the sense I have just
given. And we will be speak about the phenomenon of truth, the phe-
nomenon of the proposition, the phenomenon of speaking, the phe-
nomenon of time, and the like.

Husserl’s Logical Investigations gave contemporary logic a push that,
relatively speaking, impelled it deeper into the dimension of philosophi-
cal questioning. But on the other hand, people generally neglected the
§6. Psychologism: the name and the concept 29
really positive suggestions and tendencies of the book, which also, in
fact, were not so easy to understand since they were full of obscurities.
Even today we are still caught up in the process of self-clarification,
which can only occur in conjunction with concrete work. As long as the
work is in progress, the process of clarification will remain open. In fact,
it was not so much the positive work of Husserl’s book that had an ef-
fect, but rather the critical work found in the first volume, titled “Pro-
legomena to Pure Logic.” This critical work was more easily accessible
to the understanding of problems at that time, [34] because as a cri-
tique, it had relevance to the predominant forms of inquiry into logic.
From the critical perspective of his book, Husserl called those ap-
proaches “psychologism.”

§6. Psychologism: the name and the concept
An “-ism” always means the emphasizing of something that legitimately
or illegitimately takes priority. It could be a particular attention to some-
thing or a defense against something. “Psychologism” expresses the pri-
ority of psychology, particularly with regard to logic and its project.

How does psychology get its dominant position with regard to logic?
How do these two disciplines come to be related? Logic deals with
Adyoc, the statement, whereas psychology deals with Wuxn, or in
modern terminology, with “consciousness.”

If you recall the threefold division of philosophical disciplines that
we began with in our first meeting—logic, physics, ethics—you notice
that psychology is not to be found there. Someone might say, “Well, the
ancients did not yet have a psychology.” True, they did not have a psy-
chology in the sense of a particular discipline, but in those days psychol-
ogy belonged in physics, the scientific study of the world or of nature in
the broad sense. For the ancients psychology meant the science of living
nature. In its ancient Greek sense, psychology meant roughly the same
as what we today call biology, using the word in its literal sense: the sci-
ence of life. Or more exactly we should say “zoology,” because “life” as
treated in ancient psychology had the connotations of Car). As Aristotle
understood it, Cwr) is the being of plants and animals. It is “life” in to-
day’s sense of “the biological,” whereas for the Greeks Bioc, taken in a
quite extreme sense, means the same as human existence or personal
being, as for instance the word “biography” shows. In Aristotle’s Ethics,
the word Pioc refers to a possibility of existence. Bloc Dewentucds means
[35] the existence of someone who does science.

The terms “biology” and “psychology” are interrelated. Biology would
mean the science of human existence or of its foundations. It would be
an inquiry into the foundations of “ethics.” As the science of Bioc, psy-
30 Prolegomenon

chology belongs in ethics; as the science of Cw, it belongs in physics. In
fact, in ancient times psychology was worked out in both senses with-
out a clear distinction. This confusion continues right up to today. If we
are honest, nobody today can say what psychology is. Both as a concept
and a project, this discipline is entirely ambiguous. The lack of clarity
goes back to the beginnings of ancient philosophy and to its ways of
posing the respective questions.

The very concept of psychology is ambiguous: on the one hand, it is
the science of natural life; on the other hand, it is also the science of
“psyche” in a narrow sense, the science of human existence. The am-
biguity is heightened by the fact that the natural science of life has
expanded whereas the study of life in the sense of human existence
has gone deeper. And so people either try to unite the two sciences, or
they give one of them priority over the other.

Today, for example, we speak of two psychologies. One of them
specifically studies the causal interconnections of mind. Here we are
thinking of a natural science; and insofar as it explains mind by means
of the laws of causality, we call it an explanatory (erklarende) psychol-
ogy. But at the same time, we realize that mental life—so-called “lived
experience”—cannot be subsumed under the laws of nature as if we
treated these experiences like mere things of nature. Instead, they can
be understood. We can understand the interconnections of lived experi-
ence as interconnections of human motivations—and we see that
mind is a field of interconnections that can be understood. So, for
causal interconnections, an explanatory psychology; for human moti-
vational interconnections, an understanding psychology. But if we ask
what the whole of this psychology is—i.e., what holds both of them
together not as a summation but as the underlying wholeness—we get
no answer. In fact, the question has never really been posed.

But the problem [36] is even more complicated, inasmuch as in the
course of its development in the modern epoch, the study of mind has
concentrated on conscious mental processes. It has focused, in a word,
on consciousness—“lived experience” in the narrow sense—so that
since Descartes psychology is essentially the science of consciousness.
Moreover, in the development of modern philosophy, this science of
consciousness has fallen into a natural-scientific methodology with
the result that even the network of objects that we call understandable
has been characterized as a network of nature. Therefore from an-
other viewpoint, we have to speak of the natural-scientific method’s
second breakthrough into the exploration of mind.

Nowadays, the project of psychology—if we can even delimit here a
unified and self-clarified discipline—has an entirely chaotic form. Psy-
chology is invaded by ethnology and research into the historical possi-
bilities of the life of the primitives, by anthropology, by so-called para-
§6. Psychologism: the name and the concept 31
psychology (the science of occult phenomena), by psychopathology (the
science of mental illness) —so much so that we can no longer say what
psychology is. It’s everything and nothing. Of course, by characterizing
things this way, I do not mean to cast doubts on the concrete, individual
work of researchers in the specific fields, which always, within certain
limits, brings to light relevant outcomes. Here we are speaking only of
the philosophical idea of psychology and its foundations.

This particularly chaotic development of contemporary psychology is
in fact only an indication of the process of inner self-dissolution that is
going on in contemporary existence. The substance, so to speak, of to-
day’s existence is simply this business of the disintegration of one’s own
mind and soul. Finally this disintegration, out of disgust with itself, will
hit bottom. So, if we speak of psychology in what follows, we have to be
quite clear that we basically do not know what it is. Nonetheless, given
the course objectives and the field [37] we are dealing with here, it will
suffice to base our treatment on the concept of psychology that Husserl
used in a quite traditional way.

We asked how logic and psychology get connected at all in such a
way that psychology is able to play a special role within logic.

The connection of the two becomes clear as soon as we hold our-
selves to the traditional understanding of the concept of logic. In that
concept, logic is the doctrine of thinking, in fact of correct thinking.
More precisely, it is the doctrine that teaches correct thinking, the
“doctrine of reason”—the technique, or better, the technic of correct
thinking.’ But such thinking is correct if it follows the rules to which
it is subject. Therefore, as such a technic, logic is the science of think-
ing and its rules, the science of how we should think (even Kant gave
it this definition), the science of the norms of correct thinking: a nor-
mative discipline.

The correctness of thinking consists in the thinking’s correspondence
to rules. The rules are the formulations—“formulae”—of the laws that
pertain to thought, the laws expressed and understood in propositions.
Therefore, logic deals with thinking with regard to the laws that deter-
mine it.

So, the basic theme of logic necessarily becomes the lawfulness of
thinking—or (to put it more fully) it becomes that very thinking itself,
in what it is and what it should be when measured against the laws of
thinking.

Lawfulness is the theme. Where are these laws supposed to come
from? If the determination of the laws is to be relevant to the material

1. [Heidegger uses three equivalent terms in this paragraph: Technik, Technolo-
gie, and Kunstlehre. I render them all as either “technique,” “art,” or “technic”: the
theory, principles, or study of an art or process.]
32 Prolegomenon
in question, then the laws have to be taken from thinking itself. And
not from just any kind of constructed thought, but from the actual acts
and procedures of thought. In other words, the laws are to be sought
in the living activity of the very processes of thought. Active thinking
is the same as the mental occurrence, the mental reality, that must
produce the laws. But mental reality is the theme of psychology. There-
fore, [38] the basic project of logic—which is to get the laws of thought
and to characterize the very act of thinking (which still remains a
mental process) —belongs within the competence of psychology. So
psychology is logic’s foundational discipline.
Thus John Stuart Mill writes:
[Logic] is not a Science distinct from, and coordinate with, Psychology. So
far as it is a science at all, it is a part, or branch, of Psychology; differing
from it, on the one hand as a part differs from the whole, and on the other,
as an Art differs from a Science.’ Its theoretic grounds are wholly borrowed
from Psychology, and include as much of that science as is required to jus-
tify the rules of the art. (John Stuart Mill, An Examination of S. W. Hamil-
ton’s Philosophy.* Compare Husserl, Logical Investigations, vol. 1, “Prolegom-
ena to Pure Logic,” chap. 5, pp. 78 ff.)*
And Theodor Lipps:
The very fact that logic is a special discipline within psychology distin-
guishes each from the other in a sufficiently clear way. (Grundziige der Logik,
1893, §3)>
Compare further:

2. [Heidegger glosses: “That is, as a Kunstlehre or technique [differs] from a
theoretical reflection.” ]

3. [Heidegger cites the German as it appears in the first edition of Husserl’s Lo-
gische Untersuchungen, vol. 1, §17, p. 51 / tr. 90-91. Mill’s text is from John Stuart
Mill, An Examination of Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy and of the Principal Philosophi-
cal Questions Discussed in his Writings, 5th edition (London: Longmans, Green & Co.,
1878), p. 461: Heidegger cites the text in Theodor Gomperz’s translation. The work
is reprinted as vol. 9 of John Stuart Mill, Collected Writings, 33 vols., ed. John M.
Robson (Toronto: University of Toronto Press / London: Routledge & Kegan Paul,
1981-1991); here, vol. 9, p. 359.]

4. [In LU, vol. 1, §§25-26, pp. 78-84 / tr. 111-115, Husserl discusses Mill’s
position on the law of contradiction. Neither Weiss nor Moser provides this refer-
ence, which means that Heidegger did not read it out in class.]

5. [Theodor Lipps (1851-1914), Grundziige der Logik (Hamburg and Leipzig: J.
A. Barth, 1893; 2nd edition, 1911). Heidegger takes the citation from Husserl, LU,
vol. 1, §18, p. 52 / tr. 91.]
§6. Psychologism: the name and the concept 33

Logic is a psychological discipline precisely because knowing occurs only

in the mind, and because thinking, which reaches its completion in know-

ing, is a mental happening.°®

Recall as well that in the nineteenth century the exact scientific

method of modern natural science was carried over into psychology.
According to its proponents, only in this way did psychology work it-
self up to the level of an exact science. That implies that, along with
this psychology, there was also founded for the first time the exact and
strict science that, by exact investigations into thinking and its laws,
was also sure to create the exact and strict foundations of logic.’
In this view, the inclusion of logic within psychology is clear and self-
evident, and the reasoning that argues for this connection is so consis-
tent that scarcely an objection can be raised against it. And so [39] this
interpretation of the meaning of logic and the project of psychology as
regards logic gained widespread acceptance.

As the art of correct thinking, logic will primarily aim at the secur-
ing of correctness and at conformity to rules and laws. Its basic theme
is the conformity of thought-processes to law, the lawfulness of think-
ing, which from time immemorial has been formulated as basic laws
of thinking. If these laws are to rule all scientific thinking, they them-
selves cannot rest on insecure ground but must be proven and demon-
strated with the highest degree of scientific certitude. They cannot be
invented but must be gotten from the data of thought itself, and their
universal validity must be demonstrated.

Psychologism reveals its characteristic way of asking questions in the
very way it handles and interprets the principles of thought. As an il-
lustration we choose its interpretation of the principle of contradiction
and its way of proving the law-giving nature of this principle. We will do
so in a general way, without going into the specific content of its struc-
ture and the full determination of its proper meaning. The principle:
“The same proposition cannot at the same time be both true and false.”

John Stuart Mill writes:

I consider it {the princitpium contradictionis} to be, like other axioms, one of

our first and most familiar generalizations from experience. The original

6. [Lipps, op. cit.; cited in Husserl, LU, vol. 1, §18, p.52n.2/tr. 91 n. 1.]

7. [Here (Moser, p. 79) Heidegger ends his lecture of Wednesday, 11 Novem-
ber 1925 (also the seventh anniversary of the end of the Great War), to be fol-
lowed by that of Thursday, 12 November, which opened with a 420-word sum-
mary that is omitted in GA 21.]
34 Prolegomenon
foundation of it I take to be, that Belief and Disbelief {by this Mill means
taking something as true and taking something as false} are two different
mental states, excluding one another. This we know by the simplest obser-
vation of our own minds. (System of Logic, bk. 2, chap. 7)®
Thus it is a matter of the ability of our mind to observe in an experi-
ential way; and this shows that taking a proposition as true and taking
the same proposition as false are two different states of mind. We meet
up with this in observing our minds or our inner life. Continuing:

And if we carry our observation outwards {i.e., in words}, we also find that

light and darkness, sound and silence, motion and quiescence, equality

and inequality, preceding and following, succession and simultaneous-
ness, any positive phenomenon whatever and its negative, are distinct

phenomena, pointedly contrasted, and the one {namely, affirmation} [40]

always absent where the other {negation} is present. I consider the maxim

in question to be a generalization from all these facts. (John Stuart Mill,

Gesammelte Werke, 1884, vol. 2, p. 326)?

The principle of contradiction is merely a generalization of matters
of fact, both physical facts in the outer world and mental states of af-
fairs. There are physical incompatibilities, things that cannot subsist
together.’® The same holds for facts of the mental world. States of belief
and disbelief—i.e., holding something to be true and holding the same
thing to be not true—these two acts are incompatible with each other.
Affirming and denying the same proposition make it impossible for
them to be co-present in one and the same mind.

The axiom [of non-contradiction] merely states these same facts in
a general form when it speaks of propositions that can apply either to
the physical or the mental.

Sigwart’s logic has essentially defined the inquiry into logic since

8. [John Stuart Mill, A System of Logic, Rationative and Inductive, in CW, vol. 7,
pp. 277-278. The glosses by Heidegger do not show up in GA 21 and are taken
from Moser, pp. 82-83.]

9. [This reference, which does not appear in Moser or Weiss, is to John Stuart
Mill, Gesammelte Werke, 2nd edition, ed. Theodor Gomperz (Leipzig: Fues, 1884).
In the Logische Untersuchungen, Husserl used Gomperz’s first edition (1872-1873),
in which the cited text appears at vol. 1, p. 298, and where the reference is to §4
(§5 was added in the 1872 English edition of Mill’s work, which is not reflected in
Gomperz’s first German edition). See LU, vol. 1, §25, p. 79 / tr. 111-112.]

10. [At this point in Heidegger’s own manuscript (as published in GA 21, p.
40.7) there appears the following: “(cf. Leibniz’s ‘intra’-the ‘simul’),” i.e., “(com-
pare Leibniz: ‘between’ and the ‘at the same time’).” There is no evidence in
Moser or Weiss that he spoke these words during this lecture. ]
§6. Psychologism: the name and the concept 35
the 1870s, and he agrees in principle with this derivation of the prin-
ciple of contradiction (Logik, vol. 1, §45, p. 5 n.). He calls the principle
of contradiction a law of nature that says, “it is impossible at any given
moment to say, with conscious awareness, that A is B and that A is not
B.” Because it is a law of nature, it can also be understood as a stan-
dard law aimed at the practical regulation of thinking. In other words,
it “applies to the whole range of constant concepts.”!'

It not only works as but also is a lawful demand, and it also presents
itself as a norm for the procedure of thinking.

The validity of the principle rests “on the immediate awareness
that, in negation, we always do and always will do the same thing—so
certainly we are the same persons” (Sigwart, Logik, p. 402).'*

In this way the lawfulness—and consequently, the validity—of
thinking are reduced to the uniformity in the constitution of our na-
ture [41] and of our way of thinking. Thus Sigwart:

On the other hand, if we deny the possibility of knowing something as it

is in itself, if the entity is only a thought that we produce {Sigwart thinks

he is reporting the Kantian position here}, then it holds that we even at-
tribute objectivity to such ideas that we produce with the consciousness of
their necessity. And it holds that as soon as we posit something as existing,
we consequently affirm that (even if taken hypothetically) all other think-
ing beings that have the same nature as ours have to produce the same

thoughts with the same necessity. (Logik, §1, p. 8)

So even if we admit that, to put it roughly, we cannot know the outer
world as it is but can only regulate and order our representations, none-
theless the necessity with which we connect certain representations
with one another is the criterion for the objective validity of whatever
we think by means of these representations. And we make the presup-
position that other [thinking] beings are organized the way we are, and
that they have to think what we think. Therefore, a communally held
knowledge of the objective world is possible in spite of the fact that we
do not get outside our own consciousness. In the same place Sigwart
also says that this necessary and universally valid thinking is nothing
else but the concept of what we call the essence of truth. Truth is noth-
ing but the necessity and universal validity of the combination of repre-
sentations, a necessity that is ultimately ruled by the principle of contra-
diction, the validity of which is founded on our mental nature.

Lipps says,

11. [H. Sigwert, Logik, 4th edition (1921), p. 401.]

12. Validity is reduced to the constancy of our behavior and our being; we are
firmly predisposed in such a way that we cannot do otherwise.
36 Prolegomenon

... the rules that one must follow in order to think rightly are nothing

other than rules one must follow in order to think in the way demanded

by the proper nature of thinking, by its own particular set of laws. To put
it succinctly, they are identical with the natural laws of thinking itself.

Logic is a physics of thinking, or it is nothing at all. [42]"’

This reduction of the laws of thought—and therefore of the validity
of propositions, and therefore of truth itself—to the natural constitu-
tion of mental processes can now also be understood to say that men-
tal organization is specific to human being. Human nature has this
organization; the laws of thought have a material, anthropological ne-
cessity; and psychologism is now, in a narrow sense, anthropologism.

Benno Erdmann has advocated this deteriorated form of psycholo-
gism in an extreme but consistent way in his Logik (cf. Husserl, Logical
Investigations, vol. 1, p. 155):

Since Aristotle, an overwhelming majority has held that the necessity of

these (logical) principles is unconditional and that their validity is, there-

fore, eternal. .. . People have tried to locate the decisive proof for this state
of affairs in the fact that it is impossible to think judgments that contradict
themselves. However, the only thing that follows from this {the impossi-
bility of thinking A is B and A is not B at the same time} is that those prin-
ciples mirror the essence of our way of representing and thinking. If they
reveal this, it will not be possible to carry out self-contradictory judgments,
since such judgments attempt to annul the very conditions to which all
our forms of representing, thinking, and judging are bound.'*
Consequently, the validity of the laws of thought is only relative to our
human make-up. We cannot speak with reason about some uncondi-
tionedness of the validity of these laws.

Continuing:

The necessity of the principles thus established would be unconditioned

{i.e., absolutely valid} ... only if our knowledge of those principles guar-

anteed that the essence of the thinking we find within ourselves and that

we express by means of those principles were itself unchangeable or in-
deed were the only possible essence of thinking; and {if we could show}
that those conditions of our thinking were at the same time the conditions

13. [Theodor Lipps, “Die Aufgabe der Erkenntnistheorie und die Wundt’sche
Logik (1),” Philosophische Monatshefte 16 (1880), here pp. 530-531; cited in Husserl,
LU, vol. 1, §19, p. 55 / tr. 93.]

14. Erdmann, Logik, §60, no. 369, p. 375. [Benno Erdmann (1851-1921), Logik,
vol. 1: Logische Elementarlehre (Halle, 1892; 2nd fully rev. edition, 1907). Cited in
Husserl, LU, vol. 1, §40, p. 137 / tr. 155. Heidegger adds the emphasis on “our.” ]
§7. Husserl’s critique of psychologism 37
of any possible thinking. But we only know about our thinking. We are
unable to construe some kind of thinking different from our own, and
therefore, we cannot construe some thinking-in-general as a genus of such
different kinds of thinking. .. . [43] Words that appear to describe such a
kind of thinking have no sense we can work out that would satisfy the
claim that this appearance allegedly raises. For every attempt {to produce}
what they describe is bound to the conditions of our representing and
thinking and moves within their orbit.!°
The necessity of the logical propositions for thought is not an “abso-
lute” necessity, but only a “hypothetical” one. They are valid on the
presupposition that our thinking “remains the same.”!°

We cannot deduce the unchangeability of our mind and of its basic
constitution as absolutely remaining the same. We are stuck with this
fact, and therefore with the contingency and conditionedness of the
factual. The possibility of a change in our make-up is not excluded:
maybe in a hundred years people will have to think 2 x 2 = 5. Or
maybe even now, on some other planets, living beings with a different
make-up have a mental organization that gets along without these
principles and that regulates thought with other principles.

§7. Husserl’s critique of psychologism
Husserl’s critique intends to be a fundamental one: it wants to get to
the principles of the position that it criticizes. We can explain this cri-
tique from two points of view:
a) as a demonstration of the contradiction that lies at the heart
of psychologism’s position;
b) as a demonstration of the fundamental errors of this position
when it tries to establish itself.
Concerning (a): Some preliminaries of the critique

The demonstration of the contradiction lying at the heart of the posi-
tion takes as its goal to unmask psychologism as a skeptical relativism.
For that, we have to establish a strictly formal concept of skepticism.
[44] For that we have to begin with the positive—the idea of theory.

A “theory” in Husserl’s sense is not some system of hypotheses, of
principles posited conditionally for the sake of possibly explaining a

15. [Erdmann, Logik, vol. 1, §60, no. 370, p. 378; cited in Husserl, LU, vol. 1,
§40, pp. 143-144 / tr. 155.]

16. [Ibid.; cited in Husserl, LU, vol. 1, §40, p. 147 / tr. 160.]
38 Prolegomenon

group of data. Rather, it is “theory” more in the Greek sense of Deweia:
the unity of a self-enclosed and grounding ensemble of true proposi-
tions—in the first instance, a deduction, e.g., a mathematical theory.
For every theory—i.e., for theory as such—there are the conditions of
the possibility of a rational justification of itself. One of these condi-
tions, for example, is the principle of identity: the principle of the same
universal validity of the theory’s axioms as one proceeds through the
grounded steps of the deduction.

Then there is the necessary validity of such axioms as such. If a given
theory-and-science collides with these conditions, it collides with the
very thing that makes the theory possible. That specific theory conflicts
with the very meaning that it is supposed to have as a theory. It loses all
rational (or, as Husserl would say, “consistent” ) meaning.

Now if the propositional content of a theory is such as to deny the
conditions of the possibility of any theory at all, then that theory is
absolutely absurd at its core, totally “inconsistent.” And such inconsis-
tency of meaning entails surrendering all rationality and abandoning
every possibility of a justified statement and grounding. The distin-
guishing feature of any theory of skepticism is that the very content of
its theory claims that the conditions of the possibility of any theory
are at bottom false. (Compare Logische Untersuchungen vol. 1, 112.)"

When it comes to determining relativism, it may be said that all truth
is valid only in relation to the subject who happens to make the judg-
ment. This judging subject can be understood as the individual subject
who is making the judgment here and now; or as the species: not this or
that person but human being as such, [45] in contrast to, for example, the
angels. That specific form of relativism that makes the validity of knowl-
edge relative to the human species is also called “anthropologism.”'®

* * *

Having clarified the basic concepts employed in the critique, let us
turn to the critique itself. Anthropologism as a specific form of relativ-
ism maintains that the true is what must hold true in relation to the
mental make-up and law of thought of the species in question. This
entails that the same proposition can be true for one species and false
for another. But one and the same proposition cannot be both true
and false. That would be nonsense. And it’s equally absurd to talk
about a truth that would hold only for this species or that.

17. [That is, LU, vol. 1, §32, p. 112 / tr. 136-137.]

18. [Here (Moser, p. 94) Heidegger ends his lecture of Thursday, 12 November
1925, to be followed by that of Monday, 16 November, which opened with a 400-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21. Heidegger did not lecture on Friday, 13
November. ]
§7. Husserl’s critique of psychologism 39

What is true is absolutely true, true “in itself.” Truth is one and identical,

whether it be human beings or monsters, angels or gods who understand

and judge it. Logical laws speak of truth in this ideal unity, as over against
the de facto multiplicity of races, individuals, and experiences. And so do all
of us, as long as we are not confused by relativism. (vol. 1, p. 117f.)!”

Husserl varies this same line of reasoning in many different ways.
From a formal viewpoint this argument about the contradiction in the
theory of psychologism is the most basic. However, it’s the second line
of argument that packs a particularly incisive punch.

Concerning (b): Demonstration of the fundamental errors
To anticipate the heart of the matter at this point: Psychologism tries
to demonstrate logical principles from facts, or (to put it in terms of
Leibniz, whom Husserl has explicitly in mind) to shore up vérités de
raison, “truths of reason” (truths [taken] from concepts), with vérités de
fait, “truths of fact.”?°

a) This remarkable form of demonstration can be illustrated by the
way logical principles are handled. Compare John Stuart Mill on the
principle of contradiction: It is a generalization of facts, and as that kind
of generalization, is always related to empirical facts.?! [46] Now, how-
ever, it is not just restricted to physical facts but is broadened to the
realm where it applies to mind—mental states. The principle: If there
are two contradictory propositions, they cannot both be jointly true.

This inability-to-be-true is understood as a de facto relation between
acts: their impossibility of subsisting alongside each other. Husserl
now demonstrates that this interpretation of the principles of contra-
diction—the impossibility of the co-existence of mental states—turns
the meaning of the principle upside down. The principle does not deal
with the occurrence/co-occurrence of acts of judgment qua mental
events. It deals with states of affairs that the judgments intend insofar
as they cannot subsist together.*?

So it is a not a question of a subjective, mental impossibility but of
an objective, law-governed incompatibility of valid propositions. The
direct meaning of what the principle says is that the two meanings
intended by the two propositions cannot have joint validity. “A is b”
and “A is not b”—the incompatibility of the intended “b-ness of A”
with the “non-b-ness of A”—has nothing to do with mental occur-

19. [That is, LU, vol. 1, §36, pp. 117-118 / tr. 140.]

20. [The French phrases were not spoken in the lecture: Moser, p. 97.25-32.]

21. [Here and in what immediately follows, Heidegger contrasts the real and the
ideal. To avoid misunderstanding, I translate these terms as “empirical” and “ideal.”]

22.That is, not about the togetherness [Zusammenvorhandensein] or co-exis-
tence [Ko-existenz] of mental states, but about their con-sistency [Kon-sistenz]!
40 Prolegomenon

rences and states, and their co-existence. As regards the matter that is
judged: The meaning of the judgment 2 x 2 = 4 is not something men-
tal, not something that arises and transpires in a stream of mental
occurrences along with such things as sense impressions and moods.
The meaning does not go on for a period of time and then disappear.
This content of the judgment, the content of the proposition—in a
word, the proposition itself—is what is valid, what is the truth as such.
At most, what is mental is the act of performing the judgment or per-
forming the statement of the judgment. The judgment’s adjudged con-
tent, that which is stated to be true, is not an empirical mental event.
It is something non-empirical. It is ideal being, validity.

The basic error of psychologism is that it interprets the principle of
contradiction as a statement about [47] empirical mental events and is
blind to the real meaning of the principle. The principle asserts some-
thing about ideal being, about the possibility and impossibility of
truths to have validity when taken together. It intends ideal relations
between truths, and not relations of empirical facts and events in na-
ture, be they mental or physical; it can simply never be a law of na-
ture, a law of real being.

6) Psychologism misunderstands the fundamental distinction be-
tween the empirical being of the act of judging and the ideal validity
of judged content. Corresponding to that, there is the misunderstand-
ing of the kind of lawfulness that goes with each case. The lawfulness
of the principle of contradiction is not an empirical lawfulness but an
ideal one, and its necessity is not some empirical constraint but a nor-
mative regulation.

The law says nothing about the empirical, causal dependence of
acts of thought upon each other (Wundt). The principle says nothing
about the law-governed being of temporal, individual mental events
running their course in the mind. It is not a law about empirical facts
but says something about the intrinsically and eternally valid subsis-
tence of truths, and the eternal impossibility of some of them being
held together, be they actually performed or not. The laws not only do
not govern mental events, they do not even presuppose them.

y) Because the meaning of natural laws is that they pertain to em-
pirical facts, they also can get their foundation only from these facts—
that is, only by observing and surveying such facts—by way of induc-
tion. As regards their validity all these laws, even the most general
ones like the law of gravity, are fundamentally only probable, even if
this probability is of the highest order.

As empirical laws, their defining mark is to be probable. They never
get free of this limitation which constantly and essentially goes with
them and which says: “So far as we have observed and as long as [48]
further experience does not contradict the probable law... .” On the
§7. Husserl’s critique of psychologism 4]
other hand, the principles that govern thinking are unconditioned
laws and are able to be seen only by “ideation” or from pure concepts.
They are not subject to the limiting condition, “if...” The principle
of contradiction is intrinsically valid, and its validity is independent
of how many people or what kind of people accept and enact it. It
does not mean that the validities of two contradictions are incompat-
ible so long as all individual minds think according to the same law,
but the reverse. If thinking is to be lawful, it must be subject to this
rule that is founded on the absolute state of mutual incompatibility
between contradictory propositions and propositional meanings. The
validity of the principle of contradiction is not and cannot be affected
by the mental organization of human beings, because this very prin-
ciple implies nothing about such organization. What can and do
change are mental capacities for understanding, and the degree of
the mental possibility of comprehension, and the degree of depth in
understanding.”?

6) So we finally see that even the kind of certitude with which we
understand and embrace the empirical laws of psychology and the
ideal laws governing meaning and propositional content is different.
Apprehending ideal laws is characterized by apodictic insight: the laws
are absolutely free of doubt. The certitude of our knowledge of empiri-
cal laws is propositional: it yields only a de facto and probable “it’s-this-
way-and-not-otherwise.” Apodictic certainty yields an unequivocal,
absolute “cannot-be-otherwise.”

But that lets us immediately see the fundamental error that psy-
chologism lives off. It tries to establish something about the ideal being
and ideal relations of valid statements by means of knowledge of em-
pirical events in the mind, i.e., in temporally changing reality. As re-
gards certitude, all knowledge of empirical facts has only the mark of
probability. By their very nature and claim, the principles of thought,
however, [49] are valid not for this or that case nor, as it were, for a
while, but unconditionally and absolutely. Therefore the probable
knowledge of facts can decide nothing about the unconditioned rela-
tions of validity. Likewise, the certitude of propositional knowledge of
facts is inadequate for the vision that accompanies absolutely valid
propositions: apodictic certitude.

Basic laws of thought, which do not intend empirical facts, cannot
be corroborated or refuted by such empirical facts. For all its explana-
tions, for all its claims to have the laws of thought for its subject mat-
ter, psychologism never operates in the arena where alone those judg-
ments are made.

23. [The German Urspriinglichkeit here means “closeness to the origin” rather
than “originality”; hence, “depth.”]
42 Prolegomenon

With [Wilhelm] Erdmann, the extreme anthropologist, the only logi-
cal consistency is this: If psychologism is made the court of judgment on
the nature and validity of the principles of thinking, then these princi-
ples are indeed only rules governing empirical facts. This means that the
matter under investigation is determined according to the kind of science
related to it, rather than vice versa. But then this procedure can be car-
ried out only at the price of a complete misinterpretation of the principles
of thought. These principles are not laws qua regulations of the course of
mental processes. They are principles about “propositions”; and “proposi-
tions” are what is judged in a judgment. They are the adjudged state of
affairs: the b-ness of A, the non-b-ness of A. Any incompatibility is an
incompatibility of propositions. It is not an impossibility of thinking, but
of what is thought as such. For example, someone mentally ill can very
easily assert both propositions and unite them in one consciousness.

The meaning of the principle of contradiction is not at all related to
the framework of mental events. That is, its validity is completely inde-
pendent of a possible change in the mental nature of human beings.

Psychologism became possible only because of the domination of a
naturalistic attitude over reason and spirit: the spiritual—namely, mean-
ing—is accessible only as mental [50] reality. Thus, the guiding precon-
ception of what is presumably to be treated gets inverted from what is
thought as such to thinking as empirical and mental. This inversion of
the meaning of logic’s subject matter is the source of the absurdities.

The dominance of naturalism, whereby everything is experienced
and interpreted as natural reality, is rooted in a blindness to the non-
empirical, to propositional content as such—meaning—ideal being.

Psychologism’s fundamental error is its failure to recognize the differ-
ence: a basic distinction in the being of beings. It becomes clear, then,
that interpreting psychologism as the basic science of logic (the logic ad-
equate to its subject matter) stands or falls with a correct recognition of
this difference in being. We realize that, to the degree that logic is deter-
mined by this difference, logic is constructed on an ontological basis.

What kind of entity does logic study with regard to its being? In
keeping with what we established earlier, the subject matter of logic is
truth. What kind of being is something’s being-true? And how is truth
itself to be understood in relation to the idea of being in general? The
following will have to suffice.

The discussion and criticism of psychologism makes it clear that in the
background of the discussion lie basic concepts and distinctions taken
from the fundamental, universal question about the meaning of being.
[The critique distinguishes between] the empirical being of mind and
the ideal being of the judged proposition, as well as between the tempo-
ral occurrence of the empirical and the supratemporal subsistence of
the idea.
§7. Husserl’s critique of psychologism 43

Today we can hardly conceive how such a fundamental mix-up was
possible, and how anyone could believe that we could understand any-
thing about the logical structure of what is thought as such—the
“thought”—by way of a psychological study of thinking. But the fact is
that only a very few [51] managed to stay free of this mess. Or, to put it
another way: Thought and thinking got mixed up together for the most
part; but when psychologism was attacked, it could always appeal to the
fact that it did not deny the absolute validity of the laws of thought (which
it understood in a natural sense) while empirical scientific inquiry
pressed to the fore its attitude toward the mind. Only the Marburg School,
and [Wilhelm] Schuppe with his Erkenntnistheoretische Logik, remained
relatively untouched by these opinions.**The Marburg School, by means
of a particular interpretation of Kant, protected itself against psycholo-
gism’s invasion of the theory of consciousness, and therefore Natorp
could legitimately say in a critique of Husserl’s Logical Investigations (Kant-
studien, 1901)’ that the members of the Marburg School had been unable
to learn very much from this critique of psychologism.

In fact, that is correct. But on the other hand, only Husserl’s critique
opened the way by largely exposing the contradiction, clarifying it, and
tracing it to its roots. And in that regard, we have to say that the Mar-
burg School, as counter-position, did not clarify everything. Within the
School’s position, the question about consciousness as distinct from the
so-called mental has remained very questionable. That’s bound up with
the fact that the Marburg interpretation of Kant never clarified to what
degree in Kant himself a specific psychology or even anthropology con-
stitutes the essential foundations of his critique of reason.

Hermann Cohen, founder of the Marburg School, says in his Logik?°
that this proximity to psychology is a great danger for logic, but he be-
lieved that the emergence of so-called phenomenology (which he some-
what maliciously dubbed a new scholasticism) increased rather than
removed the danger. And he was right. The phenomenological critique
of psychologism in fact increased the danger. That is, philosophy will be
forced to confront the question about what really is the case [52] with
this “mental.” Can we simply brush off the act of judging, its enactment,
or the statement, as something empirical and mental, as contrasted with
a so-called ideal sense? Or does an entirely different dimension of being

24. [Wilhelm Schuppe (1836-1913), Erkenntnisstheoretische Logik (Bonn: Edu-
ard Weber, 1878).]

25. [Paul Natorp (1854-1924), “Zur Frage der logischen Methode. Mit Bezie-
hung auf Edmund Husserls ,Prolegomena zur reinen Logik’,” Kantstudien 6 (1901):
270-283.]

26. [Hermann Cohen (1842-1918), System der Philosophie, vol. 1: Logik der reinen
Erkenntnis (Berlin: B. Cassirer, 1902; 2nd edition, 1914; 3d edition, 1922).]
44 Prolegomenon
finally press to the fore here, one that can certainly be very dangerous
once we glimpse it and expound it as something fundamental? There-
fore we could say that although this critique of psychologism is from the
outset utterly clear on the guiding distinction between empirical and
ideal being, nonetheless the positive questions that now press forward
from this distinction are quite difficult. These are questions that did not
surface first of all in the nineteenth or twentieth centuries, but that al-
ready engaged Greek philosophy, especially Plato. This distinction is the
same as the Platonic one between sensible being, the aioO@ntov, and the
being that is accessible through reason or vouc: the vontov. The inquiry
today takes up again the question of the pé0eEtc, the participation of the
real in the ideal, and it is up for grabs whether or not we can get clear
on the phenomenon of thinking, of the thought, and more broadly of
truth, by stating the problem in these terms.?’

* * *
I have already indicated that psychologism as a theory has not restricted
itself to logic but has also played a role in ethics and aesthetics, insofar as
people attempted to apprehend and understand the problems of ethics
and aesthetics from psychology. Husserl’s criticism was directed essen-
tially to psychologism in logic, although his criticism occasionally
touched in passing on basic questions in ethics. In that context, Husserl
shows that every ethics claims to be a science of norms, a science of cor-
rect acting, analogous to logic as the science of the norms of correct
thinking. But therefore it presupposes a theoretical discipline as the
foundational discipline for a normative science of norms—and that sci-
ence cannot be psychology. Rather, [53] just as logic deals with the pure
content of propositions, so analogously ethics must deal with the pure
content of norms, that is, with values. In other words, Husserl’s critique
of psychologism also opened the path to a critique of values. Scheler has
taken up this question, and in the field of ethics or practical philosophy
he has constructed an ethics of value.

We may say, then, that the essence of psychologism consists in a
confusion of empirical mental being with the ideal being of laws.
When I say “confusion,” please do not take that in a superficial sense,
as if psychologism somehow mixed up two available things, like red
and blue. Obviously the theory did not begin that way. But I would say
that the confusion is based on the fact that at that time philosophy was
largely blocked off from various regions of being. It was blind to them,
cut off from them and locked up in one specific area of being, that of

27. [Here (Moser, p. 112) Heidegger ends his lecture of Monday, 16 November
1925, to be followed by that of Tuesday, November 17, which opened with a brief
50-word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
§8. The presuppositions of Husserl’s critique 45
the empirical nature of the physical and mental, which were taken as
if they were one. We can understand this confusion in terms of the
destiny of philosophy toward the end of the nineteenth century. Every
philosophy and science has its destiny, and it would be small-minded
and bourgeois to think that we could exempt ourselves from these
conditions imposed on questioning and seeing.

§8. The presuppositions of Husserl’s critique:

a specific concept of truth as the guiding idea
Every genuine critique has to speak from a positive position. In the pres-
ent case, that means that Husserl could point out the error of psycholo-
gism and demonstrate it to be absurd, only insofar as he had already
beforehand gotten a firm grip [54] on the basic distinction of being as
empirical and as ideal. The content of the whole critique is basically
nothing but the strict and relentless enforcement of this distinction with
regard to thinking. The distinction is between thinking as an act of
thinking and thinking as what-is-thought, the “thought.”

The lawfulness of thinking, which has to be the subject matter of
logic, is not the lawfulness of the act of thinking, but of what-is-thought.
The legitimacy and correctness—the truth of thinking, the truth that
originates from the adequation of things to laws—is also a feature of
what-is-thought. With that we have a general direction for under-
standing the concept of truth that underlies the critique of psycholo-
gism and that is then explicitly carried through from the Logical Inves-
tigations onward—namely, validity.

Thus truth is not some kind of empirical property of a mental occur-
rence, like weariness or inhibition. Rather, it is a mark of the “content
of thought.” What is true in the primary instance is not the act of pro-
posing or the connections of the proposing but what is proposed as such,
the proposition. Truth has its home in the proposition in itself. The
proposition itself , as such, and precisely as truth, is called a truth in it-
self: 2 x 2=4.

To exemplify this in terms of Adyoc: In this view, what is true is not
the Aéyewy, the speaking and discussing, but the Aeyouevov, that which
is said as such, that which is sayable and posited in each case and always
in the same way: the Aextov [what can be expressed; the meaning].

Ol HEV EV TH ONMALVOLEVa, TOUTEOTIV AOWLATH AEKTE, TO AANVES Kai TO

Wevdoc UTotievtat, of 6 Ev TH Pwvn, ot 6 Ev TH KtvHUATL THS Stavoiac.

(Sextus Empiricus, Adversus Mathematicos VIII, 69)°8

28. [See SE, vol. 2, pp. 270, 272.]
46 Prolegomenon

[Some assume that the true and the false is in the signified, i.e., in the

incorporeal Aextdv; others in the spoken sound; and still others, in the

movement of the discursive intellect.]??
Truth is thus a characteristic of ideal being.

At this point we should clarify the distinction between the real [i.e.,
the empirical] and the ideal, and determine how this distinction is
relevant to the formulation of the concept of truth. To that end we
begin with a statement, a proposition: “The board is black.” The state-
ment can be roughly characterized as a succession of positings. [55]
The positing of the board as that-about-which the judgment is made;
the positing of the black from out of the already given object (the
board); and also positing as the positing-as-distinct (Statgecic) in the
sense (and intent) of im-posing blackness upon the subject. What gets
articulated, joined together, and intended in this succession of posit-
ings can be called the “judged” as such: that which is judged, the con-
tent of the positing, in short, the proposition of the blackness or being-
black of the board. The content of this proposition can be asserted by
each one of you—i.e., by different individuals in different circum-
stances, at different times, with different clarity, in different moods, in
different propositional and judgmental contexts. But what is judged in
this endless series of instances is always the same proposition. What is
intended is always one identical propositional content.

Therefore, a proposition is always a self-identical thing that main-
tains its identity in face of the multiplicity of empirical acts of positing
judgments with their empirical circumstances and properties. And
this changing mental act is differentiated from the abiding proposi-
tional content not only as a matter of fact but also, at bottom, arbi-
trarily. What are differentiated are the identity and permanence of the
proposition versus the variability and change of the positings; on the
one hand, the temporal course of the mental act while the judgment
is being performed; and on the other hand, the non-temporal subsis-
tence of the ideal meaning that is judged.

But we also know this correlation from other regions of objects. We
speak of “color” in contrast to a changing plurality of colors; and we
speak of “red” in contrast to these or those red things, a limitless pro-
fusion of different shades of red, each one having this determination
of “red.” Or the “triangle” that is to be found in a series of different
triangles, whether drawn, painted, thought of, or imagined. So we
have the idea “triangle” as self-identical, just as we have the idea

29. [In Moser (pp. 130-132), Heidegger’s opening remarks for the next lecture
(19 November 1925) offered an extended commentary on this text from Sextus
Empiricus; this commentary does not appear in GA 21.]
§8. The presuppositions of Husserl’s critique 47
“color” as something that maintains identity in the plurality of its dif-
ferent presentations. [56]

Plato was the first to understand as a whole this relation and dis-
tinction of identity and difference, permanence and change. What is
identical and abiding is what is present and visible in every triangle, in
every color, what is always already there “in” them. It is, so to speak,
what tells how the object in question /ooks. Triangle, color, house—this
appearance, the real “looks” that make up the given thing and make it
what it is, is called by the Greeks cidoc—idéa. In the first instance,
ioéa means what we catch sight of: that which is seen. But it also
means that in a thing which makes the thing be what it is.

It is not at first obvious or clear why what makes a thing be what it is
gets called an “idea.” But if we look at the way the thing in question is
grasped, we can understand why the Greeks gave the name “idea” to
the abiding essence of a thing, that which makes the thing be what it is.
What makes a thing be what it is, is its permanence: that which is
glimpsed in every individual instance. The act of seeing, in this very
broad sense of “apprehending something in itself,” was for the Greeks
the highest way of apprehending any entity. And in this way of appre-
hending through seeing, we have access to what makes a thing be what
it is. And since this content or essence of the thing becomes accessible
through seeing, it is called an “idea.” So the word “idea” is not a deter-
mination of what is meant. Instead, the term is derived from how the
meant is apprehended. This determination grew out of the fact that, for
the Greeks, looking and seeing—Oeweta, intuitus, intuition—was the
primary form of apprehension. As Aristotle says at the beginning of the
Metaphysics (1, 1, 980a20), seeing is really what human beings strive for
in the field of knowledge.*° The priority of seeing as the fundamental
mode of apprehension ultimately has its roots in curiosity. Even in Kant
and, generally speaking, in all of Western philosophy up to today—and
today in an entirely new way’'— [57] intuition, immediate seeing, has
this remarkable priority in comprehending being.

And so this one identical something that is seen in the multiplicity
of things is called the idea, and accordingly we now say that the being
of this “what,” of this self-identical something, is the idea-ness or ideal
being of something. Ideal being can now be understood as the being of
that something which makes an object be what it is, i.e., as the being
of the identity that persists without change, in contrast to the varia-
tion of its concrete instantiations. And so for Plato the properties of

30. [Heidegger takes Aristotle’s word eidévat in its literal meaning of “to see”
(compare Oupatwv, “eyes,” at 980a24) rather than in its more usual meaning of
“to know” (= “to have fully seen and therefore to know”).]

31. [The implicit reference is to Husserl’s Wesenschau, the “seeing” of essences. ]
48 Prolegomenon

that identity that he calls the idea are as follows. First of all, these
ideas or cidn, are ctd1a, i.e., eternal and ever the same, without change,
in contrast to things that change. He explains that by saying they are
ayéevnta kat AvwAEEa, i.e., what he calls an idea does not come into
being or pass away, and is indestructible, free of change. The distinc-
tion between real and ideal being goes back to this basic ontological
distinction in Greek philosophy, back to Plato.

Now we may characterize more precisely these two regions of be-
ing—the abiding, self-same ideal versus the changing real—in terms of
the way we apprehend them. What is permanent about a sensible object
is the element that is apprehended by [intuitive] reason, vovc. This
means that the ideas or the idea is the vontév, the knowable. By con-
trast, the multiple things of the real world are accessible to sensibility—
aioOnoic—and so each is designated as the aioOntov. Here again, ideal
and real being are characterized in terms of the specific mode of access
that we have to them, and not in terms of their being or modality of
being. What is more, this distinction has continued up to our own day
and above all, plays a major role in Kant’s philosophy. So for example, a
book of Kant’s, his so-called dissertation of 1770 (which in fact is the
real prelude to his Critique of Pure Reason), is titled De mundi sensibilis
atque intelligibilis forma et principiis.*” The intelligibile corresponds to the
vontov, and the sensibile corresponds to the atoOntov. Kant speaks of an
intelligible and [58] a sensible world, and today as well we speak of
sensible and non-sensible being and mean this distinction of the real
and the ideal. This distinction still prevails today, and it dominates all
inquiries, ontological as well as epistemological.

In refuting psychologism and, positively, in founding logic, there is
a fundamental ontological difference that provides the proper orienta-
tion. To summarize a bit, the ideal is what always is. It is the perma-
nent as against its changing instantiations. It stands in contrast to
those ways in which it shows itself in any given instance and comes
into appearance—i.e., in contrast to how it [sensibly] appears. The
ideal is likewise the universal in contrast to the multiplicity of its indi-
vidual instances. The idea “triangle” is the universal that is instanti-
ated in each particular triangle. This concept of the ideal, specifically
in its triple meaning of the self-identical, the permanent, and the univer-
sal, is the guiding thread of Husserl’s critique of psychologism. At the
same time it is the guiding thread for determining the being of truth

32. [In Akademie-Ausgabe, vol. 2, ed. Erich Adickes (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter,
1905; reissued, 1968), pp. 385-420; see also “On the Forms and Principles of the
Sensible and the Intelligible World (1770),” in Immanuel Kant, Theoretical Philoso-
phy, 1755-1770, trans. and ed. David Walford, with Ralf Meerbote (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1992), pp. 373-416.]
§8. The presuppositions of Husserl’s critique 49
as an ideal being. Accordingly Husserl says that just as the self-identity
of the triangle (or better, the idea of triangle) is permanent in contrast
to the real presentations of triangles, so too the self-identity of ad-
judged propositions is permanent in contrast to the real multiplicity of
the positings of those propositions. The adjudged proposition, i.e., the
true proposition, is a truth. In cases regarding the ideal, what is as-
serted in each individual proposition is a truth.

Every truth presents an ideal unity in contrast to a potentially infinite,

endless multiplicity of correct statements, each with the same form and

matter.°°
Truth is something ideal [eine Idee] whose particular instance is actu-
ally experienced in an evident judgment.**

The being-experienced of the content of the proposition in the judg-
ment is the realization of the ideal in a given case, in the same way
that, analogously, the idea “table” is manifest in a multiplicity of tables
a carpenter produces. As we shall see later, this interpretation is wor-
thy of note—both the interpretation of the judgment’s content as ideal
being, and the interpretation of its relation to acts of judgment as the
realizations of that content. [59] In one regard, Husserl himself basi-
cally overturned and quietly dropped this interpretation right after his
Logical Investigations. But nonetheless, he continues to hold on to the
determination of truth as ideal being. That will show up in the fact
that there is an ambiguity in the concept of the ideal (which for him
was the guiding concept) to which he himself fell victim. For one
thing, he claimed that this distinction between truth as valid meaning
and judgment as its realization held for individual truths and proposi-
tions. But he also carried it through with regard to the connections of
truths and the totality of propositions that we call a science.

In the first instance science is an anthropological unity, i.e., a unity of acts

and dispositions of thinking along with certain pertinent external

arrangements.”
Here science is understood as something mentally empirical, as acts
and arrangements of thought as a whole, as an anthropological unity.
Science is realized in particular individuals and their processes of

33. [LU, vol. 1, §50, p. 187 / tr. 192. In the second edition, Husserl changed the
verb reprdasentiert (“presents”) to ist (“is”).]

34. [LU, vol. 1, §51, p. 190 (Husserl’s emphasis) / tr. 194. The two prior sentences
read: “Rather, evidence is nothing but the experience of truth. Of course truth is
experienced only in the way that the ideal can be experienced in a real act.”]

35. [LU, vol. 1, §62, p. 228 / tr. 225.]
50 Prolegomenon

thought; it is really present in people, in scholars. Science is present
not only mentally but also physically in the form of writings, institu-
tions, and the like. So in the first place, science is a real, physical-
mental unity. And then Husserl says, “What makes this unified whole
anthropological, and in particular what makes it psychological, is not
our concern here.” This does not refer to the empirical context but, to
put it in very Platonic terms, to what “makes science into science.”
That is, the idea, the ideal context alone “provides [these acts of think-
ing] with a unified objective relation and, within this unity, an ideal
validity as well.” The unity of propositional content, the unity of the
propositions themselves, is what makes a science be a science. In con-
trast to that, this anthropological physical-mental unity is only an ac-
cidental realization of science. [60]

There is a single truth corresponding to the plurality of individual acts of
knowledge that have the same content; and that single truth is simply the
ideally identical content of those acts. Similarly the ideally identical con-
tent of a theory comes to be known as the same theory in a corresponding
multitude of individual acts of synthetic knowledge, whether they occur
now or at another time, whether they are performed by this subject or
that. Therefore, the theory is constituted not by acts but by purely ideal ele-
ments: it is made up of truths.’*°

So too science, as an ideal network of propositions, is realized in a
plurality of individuals and organizations. Within the network of
truths, a set of concrete issues which operates within that network at-
tains to “objective validity.”*”? Or: The ideally existing (i.e., valid) prop-
ositional contents, as such, bring the issues in question to objective
validity. The ideal being of the proposition—and this means truth—is
valid, and as valid, holds true for the subject matter that it intends.

In contrast with the empirical reality of things, the ideal being of
truth is called “validity.” Truths themselves are validities, and there-
fore we speak of non-psychological logic as the logic of validity.

Thus, in its positive moment, Husserl’s critique is focused on the
ideal content of propositions, on the meaning that is valid, on validity.
In the following sections, we will lay out the roots of this positive
focus and of the determination of truth as validity.

Now we simply want to clarify how ideal being—the idea in Plato’s
sense—determines Husserl’s positive orientation in such a broad and
almost uncritical way that it led him into a fundamental error that he
soon saw for himself and abandoned.

36. [LU, vol. 1, §66(b), p. 240 / tr. 234.]

37. [LU, vol. 1, §62, p. 228 / tr. 225.]
§8. The presuppositions of Husserl’s critique 51

We have already dealt with this without being explicitly aware of it
(cf. Logische Untersuchungen, vol. 2, Husserl’s doctrine of meaning).*®

In contrast with performances of judgments, the content of the
judgment is the ideal or the idea, i.e., the universal that is seen by way
of abstraction [61] or in Husserl’s terms, “ideation” of the exemplary
case as the thing’s “whatness.” It is seen from out of a plurality or (the
plurality not being necessary) from out of one individual instantia-
tion: from this table here, we see table in general.*?

Thus Husserl:

[Truth is] individualized in the lived experience of the evident judgment.

If we reflect on this individualization, and if we perform an ideating ab-

straction, then instead of the object [of the mental act of judgment], the

truth itself becomes the object of our apprehension. In so doing, we ap-
prehend truth as the ideal correlate of the transient subjective act of know-
ing and as a unity over against the unlimited plurality of possible acts of
knowing and of knowing individuals {and thus over against all its realiza-
tions}. (vol. 1, 229-230)*°
In that regard we should say: The content of the judgment, insofar as
it is ideal, is not at all empirical. Nonetheless, it is not ideal in the sense
of a Platonic idea, as if it were the universal, the yévoc, the genus of
the acts of judgment. And yet Husserl says precisely that: As an idea,
the content, the ideal meaning of the proposition is likewise the genus
of the acts of judgment.*!

The genus—e.g., “color”—applies only to kinds and particulars, to
these and those colors. But the universal, as the content and meaning
of the judgment, applies only to this and that meaning, but never to
the acts [of judgment]. At best, the universal—the idea corresponding
to real acts [of judgment] —is the universal essence of “act in general,”
but never the content [or meaning] of the act [of judgment]. To say that
the content of the judgment is the yévoc, the universal, the Platonic
idea for the acts of (actual or possible) judgment, is as absurd as saying
that the genus or concept “table in general” is the genus for a bunch of
teacups. Husserl asserted that the content of the judgment was the
genus of the acts of judgment by using the content of the judgment, the

38. [Heidegger refers to Logische Untersuchungen, vol. 2, First, Fourth, Fifth, and
Sixth Investigations, as Husserl’s “doctrine of meaning.” See GA 2, p. 220 n. 1 / tr.
492 n. x.]

39. [With help from the Moser (p. 127) and the Weiss (p. 34) typescripts.]

AO. [LU, vol. 1, §62, pp. 229-230 / tr. 226.]

41. [Here and in what follows, the translation is aided by the Moser typescript.
For example, the crucial word «Platonic» comes from Moser, p. 128.7, and the
critical reference to Husserl comes from p. 128.9-11.]
52 Prolegomenon

idea, in equivocal senses, both as non-sensible being and as “idea” in
the Platonic sense—and then mixing them together. (This oversight is
still operative in his doctrine of meaning.)**

No matter how widely you extend the content of the judgment (the
idea), you will never get to the acts of judgment. Husserl’s remarkable
oversight was possible only because, fascinated as he was by the ideal
and the Platonic idea, he synthesized the two meanings—propositional
validity and the subsistence of the universal essence—into one mean-
ing, and then spoke simply of the ideal in contrast to the empirical.
This oversight merely illustrates what the critique of psychologism was
really aiming at: to establish the ideal over against the empirical.

This very confusion, which is the basis here of the equivocity of
“idea,” both as non-sensible being and as [62] the universal, the ge-
nus—this confusion is already basically sketched out in the theory
from which Husserl, within certain limits, took his essential orienta-
tion, namely, Lotze’s doctrine of the world of ideas and his interpreta-
tion of Plato’s doctrine of ideas in book 3 of his Logik.* It was from this
context as well, that the term “validity” and the way of interpreting
ideal being as validity came. Thanks to Lotze’s logic, the term “valid-
ity” and what it refers to has become dominant today. Of course, only
after Husserl’s critique of psychologism and his elaboration of ideal
being did the concept of validity achieve clarity. It was also subsumed
into Windelband’s and Rickert’s value theory, so that in general we
can say that logic today is this so-called logic of validity.**

* * *
§9. The roots of these presuppositions
Although our reflections bring us into an historical context, our goal
is not to demonstrate how Husserl’s critique depends on such a con-
text. Rather, we are always guided by our specific interest in the issue,
as signaled by the question: How is truth understood both in psychologism
and in the critique of psychologism?

We now know that truth = true proposition = validity. So we ask:
What does “to be valid” mean? What presuppositions let us acquire the
concept “validity”? We can’t say the ideal is an entity that has being if
we use the word “being” in the narrow sense, with the result that
“being” would be reserved for this very special entity. If “being” and

42. [The last sentence draws on the Weiss transcript (p. 34.27-28).]

43. [See «Bibliography,» above, p. 22.]

44. [Here (Moser, p. 130) Heidegger ends his lecture of Tuesday, 17 November
1925, to be followed by that of Thursday, 19 November, which opened with a 650-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
§9. The roots of these presuppositions 53
“entity” refer exclusively to empirical, sensible being, we cannot say
that the ideal is. Lotze, who introduced the concept of validity into logic,
used the term “being” in this narrow sense where “being” means the
same as the empirical reality of things, so that “being” equals the em-
pirical realness (out-there-ness) of something. [63] Therefore, if “being”
means empirical reality, it cannot mean “ideality.” In other words, we
cannot say that [Platonic] ideas are. It is no surprise that, given the
dominance of natural scientific research in the nineteenth century, the
things of the world, the things of nature, came to be taken as true and
proper beings. But it is remarkable that philosophy as well, and even
Lotze—who spent his career fighting the predominance of naturalism
and who did the real spadework for overcoming it—even Lotze had to
pay tribute to naturalism by using the venerable term being in this nar-
row sense where it equals empirical being, empirical reality.

Now if somehow “there are” [es gibt] ideas,” and if ideas in some
sense have (to use Lotze’s terms) actuality, then the problem arises:
Since we cannot use “being” in Lotze’s sense of the term, what kind of
actuality are we to attribute to the ideas? To avoid any confusion in
what follows, let me note again: Lotze uses the word “being” as equiva-
lent to “out-there-ness,” and therefore he uses “being” for sensible be-
ings, material beings in the widest sense. I have already stressed that the
currently common term “sensible entity” does not characterize being
[Sein], but only determines the way of apprehending being. I use the
phrase here only as a concession. As an ontological term, it is absurd.
So, how must we indicate and characterize the actuality of the idea?

Lotze used “actuality” in a very broad sense, such that being is a
specific form of actuality, and that prompted the question: In contrast
to empirically real being, what kind of actuality does the being of the
ideas have? “Actuality” is the formal-universal concept, and “being” is
a specific form of actuality. But in our terminology—and I say this to
avoid confusion—I use “being” in the exact opposite sense, and in
connection with the genuine tradition of Greek philosophy broadly
speaking. There, “being” can mean both empirical reality or ideality or
other possible modes of being. I use “actuality” (Wirklichkeit) in the
opposite sense [to Lotze], as meaning [64] empirical reality.

In an earlier investigation of medieval ontology, I too followed Lo-
tze’s distinction and used the term “actuality” for “being.”*° But I no
longer think that is correct. Hence our question: What kind of actual-

45. [By «ideas,» Heidegger means something like the «Platonic,» «separate»
idealities or ideal meanings discussed in §8, and not empirical-real «thoughts in
one’s head.»]

46. [Heidegger is referring to his Die Kategorien- und Bedeutungslehre des Duns
Scotus (1916), in GA 1, pp. 189-411.]
54 Prolegomenon

ity (in Lotze’s sense) is to be ascribed to the ideas? Answer: The kind
of the actuality that applies to the ideas is validity. The ideal is valid; the
real is. Lotze asks: What kind of actuality do the ideas have? We would
ask: What kind of being do the ideas have? If we hope to grasp the
correct way of asking and answering the question, we must first clar-
ify the context within which Lotze poses this question about the kind
of actuality that the ideas have.

Lotze took up this project in his Logik, book 3, chapter 2, “The World
of Ideas.” To understand the way he interprets the being of ideas, of
“ideal being,” and consequently of Plato’s doctrine of ideas, it is impor-
tant that we keep in mind the framework that led him to discuss the
world of ideas, its mode of actuality, and its form. The question comes
down to: What does the truth of knowledge consist of? Or more pre-
cisely: How are truth and is-true to be defined and specified? And so,
preceding the second chapter, where this question is broached, there
is a first chapter titled “On Skepticism.”*”

In the first chapter, Lotze tries to show that the notion underlying
the interpretation of truth as “the agreement of our forms of knowledge
with the way things are” (p. 490) is a prejudice. (Cf. chapter 3.)

The object of his investigation is not the issues and things them-
selves but

always and only the connection of our ideas among themselves. (p. 491)

The plurality of ideas in us, and where they may come from, constitute the

only immediate datum from which our knowledge can begin. (p. 493)

[65]

We are convinced that the changing totality of our ideas is the only mate-

rial given us to work upon; that truth and the knowledge of truth consist

only in the universal laws of interconnection that are found to obtain
without exception in a given majority of ideas as often as those ideas enter

our consciousness. (p. 498)

Thus Lotze concludes this chapter:

Let us leave entirely out of the question the opposition between our world

of ideas and a world of things; let us look upon the former alone as the

subject matter we have to deal with; and let us endeavor to ascertain
where, within the world of ideas, the primary fixed points of certainty are

to be found. (pp. 503-504)

47. [Hermann Lotze, System of Philosophy, Part I. Logic, in Three Books: Of Thought,
Of Investigation, and Of Knowledge, ed. and trans. Bernard Bosanquet (Oxford: Clar-
endon Press, 1884), vol. 2, pp. 166-199.]
§9. The roots of these presuppositions 55

His position is clear: it is Descartes’s. What is given first and what
alone is given with certitude is the manifold of ideas in us, in con-
sciousness. I can never get outside them, but there is supposed to be
knowledge of them, that is, an apprehension of their truth. But within
this position (which is the only one possible), what is the one thing
truth can mean? Not an agreement of ideas with things because (as
says the argument so often repeated today), how am I supposed to
measure the ideas within myself against things outside myself? How
am I supposed to bring these into agreement? For things are always
given to me only as ideas; so then Iam measuring ideas against ideas.
(Rickert also argues this way in his Gegenstand der Erkenntnis, and he
attempts to show that ideas as such are not knowledge.)*®

But from this it is already clear that truth is something that presents
no exceptions, has no lacunae, and is never otherwise. It is the con-
nection of ideas and the lawfulness of this connection. Truth is what
keeps itself permanent, the firm point of certitude amid the changing
world of presentations. The formal pre-conception of truth is: the true,
the abiding, the stable. Truth = permanence = what always is.

Here emerges what we previously understood by “truth.” The true
is what remains permanent throughout the change of [66] presenta-
tions. In the flowing multitude of mental appearances and impres-
sions, we effect a first formation of impressions by naming something.
An example: When I have the sensation of red, I always sense a spe-
cific red (thing), here and now in the mental flow of experiences, a
unique “this red,” in this light, with this strength of color, etc. Now
Lotze says that as soon as I recognize the sensed red as red, or think it
as red, I have already transcended the sensation of this red and now
apprehend it and in some way understand it from the universal con-
tent “red”: this individual red as a particularizing of red-in-general.*”
“Red” is now raised up and thrown into relief, it is something objec-
tive which is no longer a condition we passively receive (in affection),
but rather, is the content that we name “redness,”

which in itself is what it is, and which means what it means, and which

continues to be and mean this whether or not our consciousness is di-

rected to it. (p. 15)

The affection is objectified into an autonomous content, which as an

48. [Cf. Heinrich Rickert (1863-1936), Der Gegenstand der Erkenntnis. Einftih-
rung in die Transzendentalphilosophie (Freiburg: Mohr, 1892; 6th, rev. edition,
Tubingen: J.C.B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), 1928). Heidegger read this sentence out in
class (Moser, pp. 137-138), but GA 21 confines it to a footnote. ]

49. [The two preceding sentences are aided by Moser, pp. 138-139.]
56 Prolegomenon

objectivized object is not some thing but rather something we intend
with “redness,” “blackness,” “sweetness,” “sourness,” and so on. So we
come to see that something black can become white, something red can
become yellow, something sweet can become sour. But blackvess never
becomes whiteness, sweetness never becomes sourness. Their respective
content remains eternally equal to itself; and from out of these contents,
and in terms of them, we name things as red, black, and the like. Sen-
sible things flow and change constantly. They are “what they are” (p.
508) only with regard to the contents (redness, blackness, and the like).
These are the determining concepts that we assert of things, predicates
with which we determine things “as such and so.”

We have already indicated that the formal pre-concept of truth is
the permanent, the stable. And so Lotze says: These contents (the ge-
neric determinations of the sense qualities) form “the first adequate
and solid object of an unchanging knowledge” (ibid.), “the truth of
which is entirely independent of the skeptic’s question about their
agreement with some essence of things lying outside the knowledge”
(ibid.). Seen within the sphere of consciousness, these contents are
something that is “eternally and constantly equal to itself.” (Descartes’s
ideae!) Here something is “stabilized as an abiding object of inner intu-
ition” (p. 509). Accordingly, the changing whole is not “without a
pervading truth” (p. 508). These contents are nothing other than what
Plato designated as ideas [67] (i.e., permanent existence, det Ov), the
“first true object of certain knowledge” (p. 509).

Lotze calls Plato’s doctrine of ideas “the first and most original at-
tempt to make use of this truth that belongs to our world of ideas in it-
self quite apart from its agreement with some assumed essence of things
outside those ideas” (pp. 506-507). Lotze imputed to Plato the idea of
beginning, like Descartes, with our consciousness and its ideas and for
finding in them what is permanent of itself, the qualitative content, as
the being of the idea. We won't discuss whether Lotze in this case actu-
ally interpreted Plato and got the meaning of Platonic philosophy right.
We are interested in how he understands the meaning of truth. The
problems first begin when we ask: What is the status of these unchang-
ing identical contents (blackness, sweetness, sourness, and the like)
which, in contrast to their instantiations, are always there? Are colors
as such and sound as such still something if no one sees or hears them?
Does it make any sense at all to talk about a color in itself? Lotze poses
two questions regarding this problem. First he asks: Are these contents
something at all, or nothing? And secondly: Must not some kind of pred-
icate of being and actuality belong to them?

Regarding the first question: Lotze says that they cannot be nothing
at all, because we still intend these contents when we say, for example:
“Color as such is different from sound as such.” Here I am making a
§9. The roots of these presuppositions 57
meaningful statement about something, not about nothing. We in-
tend something when we distinguish it from something else. So they
are something. But is “to-be-something” a form of being? And so we
come to the second question: What does it mean to say that sound is
when no one hears anything, or that blackness is, when no one sees
something black? Lotze remarks: “We still suppose we know, dimly
enough, what the being of things consists in, even when those things
[68] are objects of no one’s knowledge but are purely for themselves”
(p. 510). But when it comes to these contents, we can no longer talk
about “being.” Yet in another case, when we have heard sounds, we
distinguish these contents from others. And so the answer to the first
question implies that these contents are in fact something and not
nothing. As Lotze puts it, there is “a certain element of affirmation”
(ibid.). If I distinguish color in general from sound in general, and if I
say that they are different sense qualities, then I affirm something. I
have something given, to which I say yes.

A certain element of affirmation belongs to these contents. They are
not nothing, and yet they still are not things. In Lotze’s sense of the
term, they are not real. So how are we to understand the actuality of
these somethings that are not nothing? There must be some kind of in-
formation about them. Lotze tried to introduce some clarity and find an
answer, by moving into a fundamental consideration whose meaning is
crucial for the genesis of the concept of validity, insofar as that concept
was achieved within the horizon of this fundamental reflection.

As we saw earlier, Lotze already said that the contents are not noth-
ing, and he formulated that as follows: They have a certain element of
affirmation (or “affirmedness,” as he put it more exactly in another
passage) (p. 511). By “affirmation,” he does not mean the act of af-
firming. He means what is affirmed, just as analogously the term “po-
sition” does not mean the act of positing but the posited as such, and a
calculation is not the act of calculating but what is calculated and writ-
ten down. Lotze’s use of these general expressions and concepts is in
obvious connection with Herbart’s position, with which Lotze carried
on a long and searching argument in his first Metaphysik.*° Lotze says,
“There is, to be sure, a very general concept of affirmedness or posi-
tion” (ibid.). Our languages have no proper word for this concept of
affirmedness, and Lotze says that even in the word “position” there is

50. [Metaphysik; drei Biicher der Ontologie Kosmologie und Psychologie (Leipzig, Hir-
zel, 1879); translated as Metaphysics, in Three Books: Ontology, Cosmology, and Psychol-
ogy, ed. and trans. B. Bosanquet (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1884). With regard to
Johann Friedrich Herbart (1776-1841), see his Allgemeine Metaphysik nebst den An-
fangen der Philosophischen Naturlehre (General Metaphysics, together with the First
Principles of a Philosophical Theory of Nature), published in 1828-1829.]
58 Prolegomenon
a wholly inappropriate collateral idea of an [69] action that, when car-
ried out, produces every kind of affirmedness we can indicate.

What the terms “affirmedness” and “position” refer to is not related
to any kind of produced-ness, and therefore the term “affirmedness” is
more adequate than “position,” because “affirming” better expresses
the fact that, as Lotze says, I recognize something that is already there,
whereas the term “position” seems to say that I first of all produce some-
thing from out of myself. Affirmation is recognition of something which
in some way already is, something which already has actuality. That is
why Lotze says we do not have a proper German word for this general
phenomenon of affirmedness, and given this problem, we would do
much better to stick to an ordinary concept. And then he calls affirmed-
ness as such “actuality,” without even defining what affirmedness is. So
in the general and formal term “actuality,” we do not find at all what is
affirmed or whether it is something real or ideal or some other kind of
actuality. We find only affirmedness in general.

Then Lotze says that actuality or affirmedness (or he also simply
says: “actuality or affirmation”) can now be articulated in various
forms, and he even says:

We call a thing “actual” when it is, in contrast to another that is not; we

call an event “actual” if it occurs, in contrast to another that does not occur;

we call a relation “actual” if it obtains, as opposed to one that does not
obtain; and lastly we call a proposition “actually true” if it is valid, as op-
posed to one whose validity is still in doubt. (ibid.)
Here different objects are named as actual, and actuality means
1. the being of things
2. the occurrence of events
3. the subsistence of relations
4. the validity of propositions.
Being, occurrence, subsistence, and validity are the four forms of being-
actual, of actuality in general. And these four forms of actuality or
affirmedness, according to Lotze, cannot be reduced to or derived from
one another. [70] To put it in our own terms, with these four forms
Lotze provides the basic forms of being, and among these four there
now stands validity. In fact, in a certain sense validity is read off of the
kind of actuality that pertains to propositions—something to be kept in
mind. A proposition, Lotze says, has its actuality in the fact that it is
valid. And in fact a proposition is understood insofar as it is taken in
itself, apart from all the changes it can undergo.
Lotze now uses this differentiation of the forms of actuality to in-
§9. The roots of these presuppositions 59
terpret the meaning of Plato’s doctrine of ideas. He tries to show that
Plato, with his doctrine of ideas and their being, wanted to teach noth-
ing else than the “validity of truths” (p. 513). Validity is the form of
actuality that Plato basically had in mind when he spoke of the being
of the idea—but, according to Lotze, he had to speak of “being” be-
cause the Greeks had no word for validity and the kind of reality it
refers to. In his interpretation Lotze is entirely caught in the spell of
his narrowed-down concept of being (being = the actuality of sensible
things); and he finds that “to ascribe [to Plato] the absurd opinion that
the ideas have being” (ibid.), is irreconcilable with his admiration for
Plato’s profundity. In particular, Lotze tries to show that even in Pla-
to’s opinion the ideas have “the actuality of validity” (p. 514). For
what we must assert of true propositions—their identity and their
eternity/supratemporal nature—are determinations that belong to
what Plato called ideas. The “content of a truth” in the proposition is
“recognized” (i.e., it is not made) by us (p. 515). The truth already “has
been valid” and will be valid, whether it is thought or not.?! In its ac-
tuality, the content of a truth is independent of the minds in which it
is thought. So too with the idea as a “form equal to itself.” It is recog-
nized as the same in various appearances (p. 514). The idea is what it
is, independent of the things in which it can appear and independent
of the minds that can give it the actuality [71] of a mental state. “Thus
we think everything in terms of truth” (p. 515).

* * *
Plato uses the expression Ovtws Ov”? when he wants to make the dis-
tinction between an “actually valid truth and an alleged truth” (p.
514). For Lotze, the fact that Plato designated the idea as ovoia opened
the door to a misunderstanding, because ovoia means UTOoTAOIG, the
“out-there-ness” of an existing thing or substance. But ideas are not
things. So, with the word ovoia, Plato covered over what he really
meant. But Lotze is speaking here on the presupposition that ovoia

51. [By “has been valid,” Heidegger means “is valid in its essence.” This is what
he calls elsewhere the ontological perfect as in Aristotle’s phrase to tt fv Tivt
etvat, “what something always has been” in the sense of “what it essentially is [Hv]
to be something,” “the essence (of something).” Cf. GA 2, p. 114n. a.]

52. [Here (Moser, p. 146) Heidegger draws to a close his lecture of Thursday, 19
November 1925, to be followed by that of Friday, 20 November (Moser, pp. 147-
164), which began with a 575-word summary (Moser, pp. 147-50) that is omitted
in GA 21.]

53. Ovtws Ov means that which is according to the [full] measure of being; that
which is in the [full] sense of being; “is” such as only something that is properly
in being can be; being in such a way as fully suffices for being and for the possibil-
ity of being. In Lotze’s interpretation of Plato, this proper being points to truth.
60 Prolegomenon

means substance and even Urtdotaotc, whereas these are only later
Greek distortions of the term, and they do not get at the meaning of
the word at all. Ovoia does not mean substance, thing, something
“real” in Lotze’s sense, or “entity.” Ovota is what is present and/or its
presentness, that which is always there. So the word is entirely and
supremely adequate to what Plato meant. Plato is made to seem absurd
only by his interpreters, and Lotze joins them even when he thinks he
is refuting them.

But Lotze himself was in a certain sense compelled to retract his own
interpretation of Plato’s doctrine of ideas. Validity is the form of actuality
that propositions have; but the ideas, Lotze himself admits, are not prop-
ositions but at most concepts. Lotze is forced to say: “This term [validity]
can be applied to individual concepts only with some obscurity” (p. 521).
And he grants that Plato in his doctrine of ideas only “rarely” deals with
propositions. “But the fact that they had to be the most essential con-
stituents of the ideal world still did not force itself upon Plato’s mind”
(ibid.). This means not only that Plato for his part did not [72] use the
term “validity,” but also that he did not mean what Lotze means by the
term. Lotze understands the ideas not as propositions, but predominantly
as “concepts” of which alone we can properly say: They are valid.

Of course, even this admission is fundamentally skewed. Lotze
works with the distinction between judgment and concept, which Plato
did not even know in that form. When he noticed this erroneous dis-
tinction, Lotze was able to find a foundation for his interpretation
elsewhere, in AOyoc—and in a certain sense he was right. Plato deals
with neither propositions nor concepts, but only with Adyot. But this
is only an apparent foundation because Lotze overlooks the essential
element of Adyoc, namely, the factor of dnAovv [making accessible,
making manifest] which Aoyoc always possesses, whether the Adyoc
be a judgment or a concept. What is essential for Plato is not the con-
cept/judgment distinction, but Adyoc insofar as it makes something
manifest (Adyoc as SNAovv), that is, lets it be seen. And what is sighted
in Adyoc is the idea.

In these constructive interpretations of Greek philosophers, espe-
cially of the ancient heroes of philosophical thought, it always turns
out that so much of it remains obscure when we look at it through the
eyes of the “scholars.” On the other hand, it takes considerable insight
and experience to really understand and explain the positive possibili-
ties of this obscurity instead of trivializing it by way of allegedly “for-
ward-looking” clarifications and distinctions. We always underesti-
mate the necessity and the difficulty of the positive preparation we
have to have in order to avoid violating the past. It makes you stop and
think, when you notice that a thinker as distinguished and issue-
focused as Lotze did not avoid this danger.
§9. The roots of these presuppositions 61

But Lotze’s interpretation of Plato is not our theme, any more than
criticizing that interpretation is our current project. What we are aim-
ing at in our demonstration is something else: an understanding of the
genesis of the concept of validity and of the doctrine of the ideal being
of truth. By that I mean the question: What do we establish about
truth when we say that the being of propositions is validity, and that
validity is the form of actuality that Plato ascribed to the ideas, namely,
ideal being? In answering that question we will come to learn some-
thing about the [73] roots (and about a major root) of the critique of
psychologism. We get some insight into the basic orientation of the
concept of validity by asking the question, “What is truth?”

In the first place, with regard to what we said earlier about the cri-
tique of psychologism, we can now see from Lotze’s interpretation of
the doctrine of ideas how Husserl really landed in that error of his that
we noted above. Lotze says: Truth, as a true proposition, is valid; but
validity is the form of actuality pertaining to ideas; and the idea also has
the property of being universal in contrast to the sensible particulars. So
in keeping with that, propositions—valid ones—are ideas; they are like-
wise the ideal in the sense of the universal for the particulars in the
propositions—the “positions.” So if we reduce Husserl’s error to a syllo-
gism, it consists simply in the fact that he proceeded as follows:

The major: Idea = validity = proposition.

The minor: Idea = universal = form = genus.

Conclusion: Proposition = universal, identical with idea, and thus: Propo-
sition = genus to the posited judgments.**

But we now disregard Husserl’s error and instead ask: When we char-

acterize truth as validity, do we in fact gain anything toward clarify-

ing the essence of truth? Let us not forget: Lotze makes the claim for

validity that it is the form of the actuality of the true proposition. And

we must keep firmly in mind how Lotze proceeds, to the point where

he derives the four different forms of actuality.

Recall what he says at that point:

We call a thing “actual” when it is, in contrast to another that is not; we

call an event “actual” if it occurs, in contrast to another that does not occur;

we calla relation “actual” if it obtains, as opposed to one that does not ob-

tain; and lastly we call a proposition “actually true” if it is valid. (p. 511)

54. [“Posited judgments”: the German is Setzungen (also in Moser, p. 154.14),
which does not have the meaning of Position as affirmedness, that Heidegger dis-
cussed above. Here it refers to acts of judgment. ]
62 Prolegomenon

In the last clause he does not simply say, as he does analogously in the
first three cases, that a proposition is actual when it is valid, but when
it is actually true. He claims that actuality is an additional determina-
tion of truth. That is: When this actuality of the true proposition gets
identified with validity, and when validity is understood fundamen-
tally as the affirmedness of a truth, then an additional determination
(“true”) is given to the true proposition [74] without anything being
said about the truth that makes the true thing be true.

So already in the way we get to the expression “validity” within the
distinct forms of actuality, we can see that Lotze establishes nothing at
all about truth as such. Instead, something is said about what is true, i.e.,
about the possible form of its actuality. But when he says straightfor-
wardly, but unclearly, that truth means validity, the statement conceals
a seductive ambiguity—and modern logic, the logic of validity, has com-
pletely fallen victim to it. Appealing to Lotze, people say: “to be true” =
“to be valid,” and therefore, truth = validity. But the ambiguity lies in
this expression “to be true.” In Lotze’s derivation, “being-true” means
ambiguously the same as “the being of the true,” i.e., the being of the
true proposition; but one also understands this ambiguous “being-true”
as what truth itself is, or the essence of truth. And then the two are
taken as identical: being-true as the actuality of true propositions, and be-
ing-true as the essence of truth. And because the first of these two is de-
fined as validity, one also says that the essence of truth is validity.

Lotze provides no answer to the question about what truth itself is,
but merely tells us how true propositions are actual. He gets this form
of the actuality of validity by differentiating it from things, events, and
relations. Even propositions get fitted into this plurality of actualities.
Here we cannot discuss further the correctness or incorrectness of this
division into: things that are, events that happen, relations that sub-
sist, and propositions that are valid. It is very problematic because
propositions are already relations, and because the being of things that
allegedly are mostly consists in the fact that something happens in and
with them. All these distinctions that Lotze adduces intersect each
other. To begin with, these distinctions between the forms of actual-
ity, among which validity itself is found, are not clearly distinguished.
Above all, what is not clarified is why the idea of actuality can and
must be obtained by using affirmation as the key; [75] or why the cor-
relate of affirmation, namely affirmedness, is what we are to call ac-
tuality; and therefore, exactly why being (or in Lotze’s terminology,
“actuality” ) in the widest sense must be interpreted with reference to
affirmation. That is a pure assertion on the part of Lotze. He intro-
duces it without a demonstration, and as a result his deduction of the
various forms of actuality rests on an unspecified foundation.

Lotze might think that he has brought forth something new for clari-
§9. The roots of these presuppositions 63
fying the idea and its actuality, by operating (along with the entire tra-
dition) within a fundamental obscurity about the question of being. In
point of fact, affirmedness remains affirmedness whether we are inves-
tigating real or ideal being with regard to its actuality. “Sensible,” “non-
sensible,” and “ideal” are not features of being. The affirmedness of the
non-sensible says nothing about the kind of affirmedness as such.”

We emphasize that the genesis and possibility of these modes of
actuality (being, happening, subsistence, validity) are not clarified,
and that the legitimacy of the clue for getting actuality—viz., affirmed-
ness—has been demonstrated. But Lotze could answer by saying that
such demands are impossible. He writes:

And one should not ask further what this validity means, along with the

presupposition that what it intelligibly means could be derived from some-

thing else (p. 512) {in the sense of an increasing weakening in the form of
actuality as we move from being to validity}. Just as no one can say how it
happens that anything is or occurs, so neither can one say how it happens
that a truth is valid. We must regard this latter concept, too, as a basic con-
cept founded entirely upon itself alone, a concept which all of us can know
what we mean by it, but which we cannot produce by constructing it out

of components that do not already contain it. (p. 513)

Here Lotze is saying that if validity is a basic concept that cannot be
further reduced, then it means something that we can comprehend.
But at the same time [76] he emphasizes:

And finally I have to add that, when we distinguish between the actuality

of ideas and laws taken as validity and the actuality of things taken as being,

we have first of all (thanks to the superior resources of German over

Greek) merely discovered a convenient way of speaking that can warn us

against interchanging [the two notions]. But the issue we designate by the

word “validity” has thereby lost none of its wondrousness. (p. 519)

So it is more a matter of a convenient expression; but the issue itself
remains wondrous.

But if wonder (namely, about the “obvious”) is one element that
motivates philosophical questioning, it can be only the occasion for
asking a real question instead of getting thrown off by some prejudg-
ment. For even here, Lotze is caught in a widespread prejudgment that
remains just as dominant today, namely, that we must simply accept,

55. [At this point in the lecture Heidegger delivered a 225-word disquisition on
being in Greek thought, followed by the next sentence (Moser, pp. 157.8-158.5).]
64 Prolegomenon
and leave untouched, these supposedly basic concepts—even in the
case of the most general concept: “being” / actuality.

It is highly questionable that, as Lotze believes, the only way to
clarify being is to tell how it is made. Here the prejudgment is that
being is something that can be produced: a thing, i.e., a being—and
the same goes for the alleged “validity.” Certainly no one can tell us
what being-produced is, because the question makes no sense. But
granted we cannot treat being the way we treat beings, does that en-
tail that a philosophical interpretation of being is impossible? Cer-
tainly not. It only says that the phenomena of philosophy are not
things like tables and houses.

Lotze’s idea that the so-called basic concepts cannot be clarified is
the same as that of the tradition. It is usually said that being cannot be
defined. Therefore, because a definition has to state what something
is, we cannot ask what being “is.” What is a definition about? It tells
what a thing consists of, where it comes from, what its components
are [77]—homo: animal rationale. A definition says something about
the produced-ness of an entity, and thus is a way of determining be-
ings and especially things. (The task of part two, section one, of the
Posterior Analytics B is to point out exactly this tt.)

To discuss whether or not being and the like can be defined is in
fact to understand being as a being. From the start, the whole discus-
sion makes no sense. The statement “Being is undefinable” can indeed
have a genuine sense, but one that has never been understood, namely,
that because being is fundamentally different from beings, it requires
a different point of departure from that of a definition. What I have
just said entails the task and the challenge of questioning radically. It
does not provide the comfortableness of the supposedly self-evident.

If, in saying that being is undefinable, we argue in the usual fash-
ion, we would let it stand as something both self-evident and utterly
confused. (Pascal!) From what we have said, that would make about
as much sense as saying, “Since you can’t play the piano on a bike, a
bike is a useless implement,” as if every implement had to have the
property of “able-to-play-piano-on”—and as if everything we talk
about had to be definable.

As inadequately as Lotze specifies the provenance of being or “actu-
ality” as validity, the guiding thread he gives us is nonetheless on the
mark—namely, that what Plato meant by the being of the ideas is what
he, Lotze, understands as validity.

Whether or not Lotze’s particular interpretation is correct, the up-
shot is that he understands validity (= the actuality or being of true
propositions) as the kind of being that the Greeks called authentic
being and that really means the same as the thereness or presence of
cvotc in the broadest sense, although we cannot show this now.
§9. The roots of these presuppositions 65

Truths—as much as things, events or relations—“are.” Regardless of

whether propositions can be heard, [78] tasted, or touched, the essen-

tial thing about them (in our interpretation) is their thereness.

Validity has the ontological sense of the stable presence of something,
and Lotze claimed that it determined the kind of being of true proposi-
tions. Propositions = truths. Thus, Lotze attributed to truths the being
that the Greeks attributed to the world and that they understood as the
only and authentic being (since they geared the question of the mean-
ing of being to beings as world). With that we have for the first time
gotten down to the roots whence the questions and the answers in the
critique of psychologism get their determining power. Truth and the
meaning of the true qua proposition—this “true” is directly identified
with being as validity.

But with that, the meaning of being is not discussed any more than
its provenance and limits are. The question of truth is certainly not
posed, and it is not shown why exactly propositions are and must be the
proper concretions of truth.

Therefore, to return to the question that guides our endeavors: What
have we gained from the interpretation of truth as validity for the authen-
tic question about the essence of truth? Answer: Nothing. In fact, just the
opposite. The logic of validity begins by deceiving itself when it thinks that
by identifying truth and validity, it has acquired a clear and firm founda-
tion. In any case, this thesis does provide an answer to the question about
the kind of being that images have, which in a certain derived way can be
true, and as true can have a kind of being that may be called validity. Of
course, it requires a further interpretation with a different focus (cf.
below)** in order to show how that sort of thing is possible and to what
degree truth can somehow have the kind of being of the dvcet 6vta.

The logic of validity fails to show:

1. what truth is;

2. that propositions are the original and proper concretions [79] of
truth, so that the being of truth could be determined primarily on
the basis of true propositions;

3. why these propositions can have a kind of being based on the being
of mere thereness;

4. that this meaning of being [viz., “thereness”] is the sole and pri-
mary meaning;

5. even less, why being must have such a meaning;

6. and why at all the question about truth is finally coupled with the
question about being.

56. [Heidegger may be referring to his treatment of Kant’s schematism, in §31,
below.]
66 Prolegomenon

The questions we have asked here are not just some formal critical
questions that we have pulled out of the blue and put to the logic of
validity, to modern logic, and maybe to an entire tradition. No, they
are concrete questions that we ourselves will have to ask in the course
of these lectures in hopes of getting a preliminary answer.”

* * *

Precisely because of this link-up with the grand tradition of ancient
philosophy, validity has almost become the magic word for contempo-
rary logic—and not only for logic. People speak as well of ethical and
aesthetic validity (non-logical validity) and claim to show, by analogy
with the claims of psychology, the lawfulness, normativeness, and de-
terminateness of all kinds of behavior: theoretical, practical, artistic,
objective. But at bottom, this magic word “validity” is a tangle of con-
fusion, perplexity, and dogmatism.

Why does “validity” cast such a spell? Answer: because the term is
even more ambiguous than we have shown up to now, and this ambi-
guity allows the term to be very broadly applied according to the con-
text. The reason is not that its referent has been unambiguously fixed as
a universal phenomenon and that its universal relations have not been
discovered. No, it’s because the vagueness of the word and its referent
allows such an unquestioned, broad application. Its broad employment
is not because the function of its referent is clear and based on princi-
ples, but because of the concealed ambiguity of the term itself. [80]

We must again return to Lotze if we hope to show the essentially
different meanings that “validity” has, along with those we’ve already
mentioned. In sketching out Lotze’s treatment of the doctrine of ideas,
we showed how he rejects the traditional concept of truth and sets out
from the flux of ideas as a whole and from the consciousness of ideas,
i.e., from what is accessible to (in his words) “inner intuition.” The
result is that the true is what is permanent and stable, and can be ap-
prehended by this intuition. What remains permanent and stable is
the valid—invariable, ever recurring, without contingency, in a word,
the necessary. At first, this permanent something is only in conscious-
ness; but its material content consists of the determinations and law-
governed togetherness of what we naively call external things. In the
true and the stable, we find something given in our consciousness that
asserts something about the outer world without needing or being
able to be measured against it. The valid, taken as what is stable and
necessary, now has the meaning of something that qua valid holds

57. [Here Heidegger closed his lecture of Friday, 20 November 1925, to be fol-
lowed by his lecture of Monday, 23 November (Moser, pp. 164-181), which began
with a 500-word summary (Moser, pp. 164-66) that is omitted in GA 21.]
§9. The roots of these presuppositions 67
true of things that exist independently of consciousness but that we do
not attain with our ideas.

Validity as abiding content is now likewise the validity of given ob-
jects; it is objective validity: objectivity.*®

Validity in this sense is valid not on the basis of a being measured
against things, but on the basis of—and as—the stable, unchanging,
lawful subsistence of consciousness. Hence we have a second sense of
validity: “to be valid of something,” i.e., as the objective validity of
something.”

Now to the degree that something is valid in the first sense and
therefore is valid in the second sense (as holding true of beings them-
selves), to that degree this [81] truth is likewise valid for all knowers.
Now validity means neither the actuality of true propositions nor the
validity of beings but, rather, validity for knowers. Being valid is now
validity not as objectivity but as universal validity. Or more exactly, in
this third sense validity is the state of being binding [upon all know-
ers]. Hence, in the word “validity,” three fundamentally different
meanings intertwine:

1. the actuality of true propositions;

2. the relation to the being that is asserted and meant in the state-
ment; and

3. being binding for knowers.

Or:

1. truth in its actuality;

2. this truth as related to objects; and

3. truth as related to knowing subjects.

It is all called validity, and the term is meant sometimes in one sense,

sometimes in another, sometimes in two of the senses or sometimes in

all three.

Insofar as it is a statement, the valid (which also holds-true-of-some-
thing) provides information about something necessary, something that
subsists of itself, which we recognize and understand, not something
arbitrarily posited but what demands a “Yes!” and is binding for all.

It is necessary at this point to pay attention to an essential issue that

58. Cf. Lotze, p. 556: what is valid—as “objectively valid”; “real validity”; p.
557; general concept: “validity of beings,” p. 561. And 569!!

59. [There is] a metaphysical presupposition of harmony. Here the problem of
truth is turned upside-down: verum [“what is true,” is understood] on the basis of
certum [“what is certain”] and thereby [is understood] “critically.”
68 Prolegomenon

Lotze’s inquiry discussed in some detail, because his inquiry now be-
comes relevant to that issue. The primary instance of validity is the
actuality of contents and propositions “in consciousness.” That pri-
mary validity is the foundation on which objectivity is based; and
bindingness is based on both of those two. A proposition is not valid
because it holds true of objects—i.e., validity in the primary sense is
not founded on validity as objectivity. Lotze obviates such a demand
for measurement in the sense of a correspondence with something.
We cannot say “truth is correspondence.” It’s the other way around.
Because the proposition is valid, it holds true of something; and be-
cause there is something in consciousness that is stable, it agrees with
something! But even this formulation is inadequate. Why is the prop-
osition valid? Because it is something stable and permanent that must
be affirmed in itself; because it is something we have to affirm in itself,
something that we must acknowledge.

It is important to note that, as the earlier “derivation” indicated, va-
lidity remains primarily related to affirmation.®°° [82] The other two
meanings of the word “validity” only corroborate the fundamental point
we have already made: that Lotze does not investigate the phenomenon
of truth at all. It is not the case that Lotze now broaches the question of
truth for the first time. Rather, he presumes that the question is already
answered in principle by the equation: to be valid = to be true. He builds
validity as objectivity and validity as universal bindingness on the first
concept of validity, and to that extent these concepts lead us even fur-
ther away from the central question about the essence of truth.

The predominance of the concept of validity pushes the question of
truth more and more into the background arena of secondary problems
and ends up reducing it to the intrinsically unimportant question about
the kind of relation [viz., “bindingness”] that truth has to the possible
comportment of the “subjects” who acknowledge it. Sometimes this
process of devaluation goes so far that the first meaning of validity is
forgotten, and truth is even identified with universal bindingness. The
true is what is valid for all, what everyone is bound to acknowledge.

The much-extolled “discovery” of validity is only the semblance of
a genuine question about the essence of truth. But let me say one final
thing: we have yet to reach the lowest point in the downfall of the
question of truth.

Philosophers felt they had to get beyond Lotze. They wanted to radi-
calize him and for the first time get the final meaning of his doctrine
of validity (and therefore true philosophy) by means of the following
considerations.

60. Affirmation, assensus, agreement; iudicium [judgment] in the specific sense
of recognition.
§9. The roots of these presuppositions 69

As one form of actuality, validity is related to affirmation in general.
In validity, true propositions are affirmed, i.e., recognized and acknowl-
edged. But on closer inspection, what gets acknowledged in such ac-
knowledgment is not validity but a value. In other words, what the true
proposition affirms—namely, truth as such—is a value. To acknowledge
true propositions is to judge; but judging is the basic form of knowledge.
In knowledge, a value is acknowledged. Thus, knowledge is directed to
a value. The object of knowledge is a value. [83] Windelband and Rick-
ert have followed the path of Lotze’s theory of validity to the point of
making it into a theory of knowledge. Not just practical and aesthetic
behavior, but theoretical behavior as well is a comportment toward val-
ues. In general, therefore, that to which consciousness relates itself is
always a value. And since we can concretely characterize human be-
havior in these various regions as culture, values are cultural values.
Therefore, philosophy has to be the philosophy of value, and as such, it
is a philosophy of culture. Its project is to work out a system of values.

That is why the journal Logos, which grew out of this philosophical
circle, bears the subtitle “International Journal for a Philosophy of
Culture.”*!

The above captures, in rough and ready fashion, the real meaning
of value philosophy as worked out in connection with Lotze. In keep-
ing with the prevailing winds of philosophy at the time, value philoso-
phers linked Lotze’s doctrine to Kant’s philosophy.® In the process,
people discovered that Kant had written three critiques: The Critique of
Pure Reason (re., theoretical comportment), The Critique of Practical Rea-
son (re., practical, moral comportment), and The Critique of Judgment
(re., aesthetic comportment). Kant’s three critiques are cut to order, to
fit the three values of the true, the good, and the beautiful. So these
three values are fundamental values.

But Kant also dealt with religion, although not in such a way that
his treatment could be put on the same level as the “critiques.” Yet
religion has to be given a place in the system—and for that purpose,
the value of “the holy” was invented. For Windelband, of course, the
holy is not an independent value—I am speaking now of the period
around 1900 and before the war. But since the war, the world has be-

61. [Logos. Internationale Zeitschrift fiir Philosophie der Kultur, ed. Richard Kroner
and Georg Mehlis, with the collaboration of (among others) Edmund Husserl,
Heinrich Rickert, Wilhelm Windelband, and Ernst Troeltsch (Tiibingen: J. C. B.
Mohr (Paul Siebeck)). This large annual—some three to four hundred pages per
volume—was published in twenty-two editions between 1910 and 1933. Husserl
published his “Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft” (Philosophy as a Rigorous
Science) in the first volume (1910-1911: pp. 289-341).]

62. Cf. Wilhelm Windelband, Prdludien. Aufsdtze und Reden zur Einleitung in die
Philosophie (Strassburg, 1883; Tiibingen: J. C. B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), 1884).
70 Prolegomenon

come very religious—even world congresses are organized analogous
to the International Union of Chemists or [84] of Meteorologists, so
that today we can risk saying that religion, too, is a value. And we
don’t stop there. The insights presumably get more profound: God is a
value, indeed the highest value. This proposition is a blasphemy, and
it is not made less blasphemous by the fact that theologians propound
it as ultimate wisdom. This would all be very funny if it were not so
depressing. It shows that philosophers no longer philosophize from
the issues but only from the books of their colleagues. In all of this the
only thing of import for science is to understand the direction of this
philosophy and theology, and to get an insight into the source of this
utterly radical distortion.

Windelband and Rickert have taken the path of devaluing Lotze’s
doctrine of validity into a philosophy of values. We may briefly men-
tion the major steps in this devaluation as well as some evidence.

The most important essay on the connection of value philosophy
with Lotze is Windelband’s “Beitrage zur Lehre von negativen Urteil”
[Contributions to a Theory of Negative Judgments].° There he con-
nects up with Brentano’s doctrine of judgment, which maintains that
judgment is acknowledgment. Windelband shows the connection with
Lotze’s doctrine of validity. (Brentano’s doctrine is mentioned, but not
really in keeping with the significance it has for Windelband.)

Rickert got a fundamental grip on the idea that judgment acknowl-
edges values in his Der Gegenstand der Erkenntnis, in 1892 (his inaugural
dissertation at Freiburg).°*In keeping with the then-dominant view
that judgment is the basic and authentic form of knowledge, Rickert
broadens Windelband’s thesis: Judgment is acknowledgment of values;
judgment is knowledge; truth is a value. To this day, Rickert has not
retracted one of these fundamental theses. His ideas today are merely
less clear, because he has subsumed into his theory of knowledge both
phenomenology and some essential suggestions of his student, Lask.

As evidence, some propositions from Rickert: [85]

All knowledge begins with judgments, advances in judgments, and can

consist only in judgments. . .. Knowledge is affirmation or denial. We want

to try to learn the consequences of that. (First edition, pp. 55-56)

Judging is a mental process. It does not belong to those processes in
which we examine things with an indifferent attitude, but only to the
processes of judgment: affirmation and denial {or approval and disap-
63. [The essay was published in the Strasburger Abhandlungen zur Philosophie

(1884), as part of a festschrift honoring Eduard Zeller on his seventieth birthday. ]

64. [Heinrich Rickert, Der Gegenstand der Erkenntnis; Einfiihrung in die tranzen-

dentale Philosophie (Tubingen: Mohr, 1892).]
§9. The roots of these presuppositions 71
proval, acknowledgment or disavowal—for Rickert they are all the same},
in which we take an interest in the content of our consciousness as some-
thing of value to us. (p. 56)°

So in affirming and denying, I take an interest in a content of con-
sciousness as a value.

Now because what is valid for the judgment must also be valid for knowl-

edge, the affinity of judgment to willing and feeling entails that pure theo-

retical knowledge is a matter of comportment toward a value. The alterna-
tive comportment of approving or disapproving makes sense only in

contrast to valuing. (p. 57)

In each judgment, I know—at the very moment I judge—that I am ac-
knowledging something timelessly valid. Thus evidence, treated psycho-
logically, is a feeling of pleasure, combined with the peculiarity that the
evidence lends a timeless validity to a judgment and consequently gives it
a value that no feeling of pleasure otherwise yields.

Because it is timeless, the value is independent of any content of con-
sciousness. (p. 61)

Thus, because it subsists in timeless independence—in other words,
because it is a validity—value is the object of all cognition.

Criticism of this position is unnecessary and fruitless. What interests
us is only its connection with Lotze and its interpretation of Lotze’s
ideas. As insignificant as value philosophy is in itself, it nonetheless did
have a certain function in the last century, especially between 1880 and
1900: to fight against rationalism and against the predominance of nat-
ural science in philosophical thought. To be sure, Dilthey had already
been long at work during this period with very different insights. But,
hard pressed by the issues, driven onward by a genuine search, and
guided by a noble sense of caution, he had to forego, basically for his
whole life, putting his investigations into convenient [86] propositions
and systems for easy consumption in the marketplace. Dilthey also had
an essential effect on the other vein mined by value philosophy: con-
cern for the humanities. The well-known distinction between general-
izing and individualizing concept-formation and between the natural
sciences and the humanities goes back, in this form, to Dilthey. How-
ever, now the distinction is linked up with the concept of value.

Demonstrating the ambiguity of the concept of value gave us the
opportunity to show how contemporary value philosophy could origi-

65. [Moser (p. 177) prints this paragraph as a quote from Rickert. GA 21 puts
quotation marks around only the last sixteen words (“. . . we take an interest,”
etc.).]
72 Prolegomenon

nate from it. But what is important for us is the reverse connection,
the connection backwards with the grand tradition of philosophy.
Taken in its first sense—that of the being of the ideas—validity is con-
nected with Greek ontology. Secondly, inasmuch as validity is also
understood as objectivity and holding-true-of-something, Lotze’s doc-
trine of validity gets linked up with Kant. And thirdly, Lotze’s doc-
trine, with Kant’s, also leads back to Descartes, to the degree that
holding-true-of-something is likewise understood as certitude in the
sense of absolute certitude and universal holding-true, and to the de-
gree that this whole inquiry into objectivity and holding-true is geared
to the doctrine of the immanence of consciousness. So, in the back-
ground of this whole theory of validity, with all its ambiguity, there
stands Greek philosophy, Descartes’s cogito ergo sum, and Kant when he
is interpreted in a certain way. With this, the origins of the logic of
validity are exposed for the first time.

In examining the roots of the presuppositions at work in the critique
of psychologism, I have limited myself to the connection with Lotze. But
just as important as this line to Lotze, is the line to Bolzano, the Austrian
philosopher of the beginning of the last century, who published the four
volumes of his Wissenschaftslehre in 1837.°° There, free from any kind of
psychologism, he states in the most extreme form his doctrine of propo-
sitions-in-themselves and truths-in-themselves. [87] Bolzano had been
entirely forgotten in the course of the nineteenth century, but in the
1890s Twardowski, who came from the school of Brentano, went back
to Bolzano the logician. In 1896 Twardowski published his treatise Zur
Lehre von Inhalt und Gegenstand der Vorstellungen, which has become very
important for contemporary logic.*’ In the context of this small mono-
graph, reference was made for the first time to Bolzano. However, he
came into the public eye only by the fact that Husserl’s Logical Investiga-
tions (vol. 1, §61, 224ff.) awakened a special interest in him and, Iam
convinced, overestimated him philosophically.

Because of this new attention to Bolzano which was stimulated by
Husserl, an interest in him grew up, but his works were very difficult
to find; thus a new edition of his Wissenschaftslehre began to be pub-
lished in 1914, when two volumes, the most important, were released.
But it is a complete misunderstanding of the proper sense of Husserl’s

66. [Bernard Bolzano, Wissenschaftslehre, 4 vols. (Sulzbach: Seidel, 1837; 2nd
edition, 1914-1931; repr. Aalen: Scientia Verlag, 1970). The text appears in Ber-
nard-Bolzano Gesamtausgabe, vol. 1 (Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Fromann-Holzboog,
1969).]

67. [Kazimierz (Kasimir) Twardowski (1866-1938), Zur Lehre vom Inhalt und
Gegenstand der Vorstellung (Vienna, 1894); translated as On the Content and Object of
Presentations: A Psychological Investigation, trans. R. Grossmann (The Hague: Marti-
nus Nijhoff, 1977). The text was Twardowski’‘s Habilitationsschrift.]
§9. The roots of these presuppositions 73
Logical Investigations to simply say—as is common with Rickert, and
with contemporary logic generally—that what Husserl provides in his
Logical Investigations is an emendation of Bolzano.°*

* * *

Bolzano himself was determined in an essential way by Leibniz; Husserl
was as well, and directly—not only via a detour through Bolzano. The
connections with Leibniz that Husserl expressed himself on (Logical In-
vestigations vol. 1, §60), concern less the doctrine of truths-in-themselves
than another essential element of contemporary philosophy.

With the above, we have shown the roots of the distinction be-
tween real and ideal being in thinking, as well as the doctrine of the
true proposition as validity. We also looked at the consequences the
doctrine of validity has for the development of value philosophy.
Moreover, we have already anticipated certain questions of the cri-
tique, which according to the arrangement of this course, were re-
served for §10. But it only seems that way, for in fact we are not yet
prepared to make a critique of—and hence, to take a fundamental
stance on—the critique of psychologism. The reason for this is that we
have not yet clarified Husserl’s critique of psychologism in [88] its
positive core. Rather, we have intentionally sketched out psychologism
and Husserl’s critique of it only in the form and to the degree that Hus-
serl laid it out in the first volume of the Logical Investigations and that
his contemporaries understood it then and still understand it today.
That is, we sketched it out in the form that this critique has taken posi-
tively, e.g., in the logic of validity and value.

But we have by no means gone to the core, to the sense in which
Husserl wanted these critical affirmations to be understood. Husserl’s
critique of psychologism is a critique of psychology—and it intrinsi-
cally must be that, if it is to become something positive and not merely
an identification and demonstration of errors. It is a critique of psy-
chology in the sense that in place of the function and role that psy-
chology ascribes to itself, a new kind of research is introduced: phe-
nomenology. The fact that the critique of psychologism is really a cri-
tique of psychology also shows that, yes, the problems that psychologism
claims to answer are conceded and affirmed to be legitimate—but
with the proviso that psychology, in both its former and present condi-
tions, is shown to be incapable of solving these questions, or even of
asking them in a meaningful way.

This meaning of the critique of psychology is no more understood

68. [Here (Moser, p. 181) Heidegger ends his lecture of Monday, 23 November
1925, to be followed by that of Tuesday, 24 November, which opened with a 1000-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
74 Prolegomenon

now than it was then. Philosophy saw the opposition of ideal to real

being as the only essential thing, so much so that, when the second

volume [of the Logical Investigations] was published right after the first
volume—which had four times the pages and positive content of the
first volume, and which contained the phenomenology—some said
that in the second volume Husserl was still continuing to do psychol-
ogy. Or, as Sigwart says at the end of the introduction to the third edi-
tion [of his Logik] in 1904: “Husserl may be battling against psycholo-
gism, but he is guilty of the very same heresy.” So, we will be able to
take a position on Husserl’s critique of psychologism only when we

have understood this critique in its proper sense. [89]

§10. Anti-critical questions. The need to take the
question of the essence of truth back to Aristotle

We now pose three questions:

a) What is the core of the critique of psychologism, and why must the
critique of psychologism be a critique of psychology?

b) What positive element does this critique of psychologism offer with
regard to the guiding question about understanding and interpret-
ing the phenomenon of truth?

c) What is the connection between this interpretation of truth (= b)
and the one we distinguished in the first place, that of propositional
truth (validity)? And do the two formulations satisfy the demand
for a radical exposition and interpretation of the phenomenon?

a) Why must the critique of psychologism be a
critique of psychology?

The separation of the real mental being of thinking and the ideal con-

tent of what is thought is so obvious that you might think that you

only have to maintain this separation firmly and consistently in order

(a) to thwart any complicating influence from psychology (which

deals with the real mental), and (b) to have a univocal, delimited

arena for logic. The logic of validity, and especially Rickert’s concept of
psychology, is of this opinion. It is most clearly seen in Rickert’s con-
cept of psychology, which sees psychology as quite analogous to me-
chanics. Psychology deals with real being and therefore is a pure natu-
ral science. On the other hand, logic deals with the ideal being of
validity (Die Grenzen der naturwissenschaftlich Begriffsbildung) .°

69. [The reference is to Heinrich Rickert, Die Grenze der naturwissenschaftlichen
Begriffsbildung. Eine logische Einleitung in die historischen Wissenschaften (Tiibingen:
§10. Anti-critical questions 75

So we have an apparently inviolable separation between two disci-
plines, one of which deals with the being of thinking and the other
with validity. What could be more plausible? And yet this is the way
to exempt ourselves from really understanding and investigating the
issues. [90] For in the final analysis we have to ask whether the think-
ing-of-what-is-thought is what is really actual. In the final analysis,
neither real mental thinking in and for itself nor, quite separate from
the former, the ideal being of thought (where what-is-thought = the
valid) —neither one of the two—ever really touches on what we mean
by the concrete thinking-of-what-is-thought, which is the most vital
actuality in which thinking and thought “are.””°

Then what about this thinking-of-what-is-thought, i.e., this think-
ing that, as long as it is thinking something, actually is “real” think-
ing? Given the distinction that has already been made, in this think-
ing-of-what-is-thought, a “relation” is actual between real thinking
and the ideal thought as long as there is actual, living thinking going
on. And when thinking is actual thinking, it obviously is not thought-
less, or better, thought-free, for even so-called thoughtless thinking is
always thinking about something, only without being disciplined and
methodically focused on the issue. But in that separation, thinking is
something psychologically real—and then next to it, or over it, or be-
hind it, or who knows where, there is the ideal. If the ideal is what is
thought about and conceptualized, then it also must be at hand along
with the ideal. What kind of relation does the ideal have to the real?
Do they border on each other like two regions of things—like the land
and the sea? Is there a real mental thing, and then glued on to it (or,
as Rickert used to say, “adhering” to it), there is the ideal? Seriously
now, has anyone ever seen or found something like that?

Is the relation of the ideal to the real a real relation? How does va-

lidity, so to speak, become being in Lotze’s sense, entirely against Lo-
tze’s thesis that each region is absolutely irreducible to the other? Or
maybe it’s the other way around: Does the thinking-of-what-is-
thought, as real, become the ideal? Even that will be impossible as
long as one maintains the total distinction and non-interchangeability
of the two. And yet “between the two” there is precisely a real act of
thinking as a thinking-of-what-is-thought, a realness of the ideal!
And yet the tenor of the whole critique of psychologism as we have
sketched it up to now is that the timeless is diametrically opposed to
the temporal. [91]
J.C. B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), 1896; 5th edition, 1929); translated as The Limits of Con-
cept Formation in Natural Science: A Logical Introduction to the Historical Sciences, ed. and
trans. Guy Oakes (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986).]

70. [With help from Moser, p. 189.9-16.]
76 Prolegomenon

What about this “reciprocal relation”?’! Isn’t there a gap here, and
don’t we need to build a bridge across it? An old question seems to
emerge here in new form, the question about the participation or WéOeEtc
of the real (the sensible) in the ideal (the non-sensible). The thinking-of-
what-is-thought is; but what kind of being is that? Is it the being of this
existent unity of the real-ideal? Let us resist being overawed by the obvi-
ous separation of the real and the ideal. Above all, we must maintain
that living thinking is the thinking-of-what-is-thought and that this is
the only reason we inquire into it and seek its rules. If we do that, we
will see that behind the seemingly obvious separation of the real and the
ideal there lurks a difficulty, in fact the heart of the problem. In the final
analysis, this separation not only contributes nothing to solving the
problem but in fact radically inverts the formulation of the problem, and
thereby condemns the discussion to futility. But the central problem
here is how we can throw a bridge over this gap. As Spranger” says:

All of us—Rickert, the phenomenologists, the movement connected with

Dilthey—we all find ourselves in the great struggle {imagine: the great

struggle!} for the timeless in the historical, for the realm of sense and of its

historical expression in a developed, concrete culture, for a theory of values
that leads beyond the subjective to the objective and valid.”
That is correct except for one thing: Dilthey would have repudiated
this association in horror.

But philosophers were able to get almost sentimental about this
deep and ponderous thought. But maybe it is time to say thoughtfully
for once that in more than two millennia this problem has not made
any progress. [92]

Maybe it is time to ask ourselves whether it is a real question at all, or
whether there is something fundamentally wrong with it or with our
understanding of it, or even whether Plato really meant anything like
that. Perhaps this seemingly profound question about bridging the gap
between the real and the ideal, the sensible and the non-sensible, the
temporal and the timeless, the historical and the suprahistorical, is only

71. An empty determination! For an extreme case, cf. Richard Hénigswald, Die
Grundlagen der Denkpsychologie. [Studien und Analysen, 2nd unchanged edition
(Leipzig: B. G. Teubner,] 1925), 39-40: “The basic mental function of the tempo-
ral/non-temporal determinedness. Just as ‘thought’ can be experienced, just as it
must be able to be realized temporally in [the act of] being experienced, so too
meaning ‘becomes’ word in precisely the same way.”

72. [Eduard Spranger (1882-1963), a student of Dilthey’s (and briefly arrested
by the Nazis in 1944). His works are published in his Gesammelte Schriften, 11 vols.,
ed. H. W. Bahr et al. (Heidelberg: Quelle & Meyer, 1960-1980).]

73. Logos 12 [1923]. Festschrift for Rickert. On Rickert’s system, cf. p. 198.
§10. Anti-critical questions 77
a foolish undertaking that doesn’t even care to ask whether one actu-
ally thinks these “opposing pairs” as simply and easily as such lists make
it seem: real and ideal, sensible and non-sensible, being and validity,
historical and transhistorical, temporal and timeless. Nonetheless, this
foolishness gets the semblance of a justification as follows. First you in-
vent these two regions, then you put a gap between them, and then you
go looking for the bridge. “Take the gap and build the bridge” —that’s
about as clever as the old instruction: “To make a gun barrel, you take
an empty space and put some steel around it.” Intelligent psychologism
has yet to concede that it has been refuted, and perhaps the reason for
that lies in this meaningless way of stating the problem. For psycholo-
gism can rightly appeal to the fact that this almost chemical separation
of thinking from knowledge has provided nothing essential toward un-
derstanding what is the most actual of all: lived thinking itself, lived life
as knowing.

I will say further that this position, which thinks itself so philo-
sophical in contrast to psychologism, and which believes itself to have
surpassed naturalism, in fact harbors an even grosser and more basic
form of naturalism, one that is much harder to get a grip on. Basically
we are in a situation where we have to see these two separate orders
or fields or spheres or regions as coming together in unity: that which
has being and that which has validity, the sensible and the non-sensi-
ble, the real and the ideal, the historical and the transhistorical. We
have not yet apprehended an original kind of being in terms of which
we could understand these two fields as possible and as belonging fo
that of being. [93] Philosophers don’t even ask about such being. In-
stead they flaunt the “fundamental uniqueness” of this separation and
see themselves as constrained to bridge or link the two together so
that they can adhere to each other and become a whole. Even contem-
porary physics does not present the structure of the atom in such a
primitively atomistic and mechanistic way. Such patching together
might make sense as regards atoms, as material beings—but no, not
even there! So obviously it’s absurd to use such a linking-up of oppo-
sites when it comes to beings like the mental and the ideal, which
have absolutely no character of material thingness.

But what about the entity that does not, as it were, cast a bridge over
the gap between these two regions, but instead (if one has to under-
stand it in this way) renders possible these two regions of being in their
original unity? Husserl has not asked the question. Rather, within the
framework of psychologism and in a manner that derives from psy-
chologism, he asks what the mental as such must be if it is able to stand
as the real in relation to the ideal.“ From the beginning, therefore, Hus-

74. [With help from Moser, p. 195.15-17.]
78 Prolegomenon

serl also held to that distinction and then asked about the basic struc-
ture of the mental, especially as regards what we call presentation,
judgment, acknowledgment, taking positions, positing, insight, and
thinking. Are these phenomena—which we are so quick to call pro-
cesses and events—actually inside us in the way that the circulation of
the blood and the function of gastric juices are, with the simple differ-
ence that they are not sensible and cannot be treated in a direct chemi-
cal and physical way? Or does what we mean by thinking, judging, and
so forth—this “mental,” as such—have its own structure and its own
kind of being? We should have asked about the structure of one of the
two regions in order to understand in it the pé0eEtc. To put it more ex-
actly: Husserl did not really need to ask for a directive regarding the
basic character and elements of the mental question, insofar as he al-
ready had received such an orientation from his teacher, Franz Brenta-
no.’ 7° [94]

* * *

Brentano had already explained these basic determinations of the
mental in his Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkt, of which only the
first volume was published.” This Psychology from an Empirical Stand-
point is divided into two books: book 1, “Psychology as a Science”; and
book 2, “Mental Phenomena in General,” the real heart of Brentano’s
investigations. The point is to determine what the mental really is, in
order to go on from there to the various ways in which mental being
can comport itself. The basic determination of the mental is intentional-
ity. Understood very roughly, intentionality is self-directedness-to-
something. All mental comportments, as mental, are determined by
the fact that they are directed toward something. Now, there are vari-
ous ways to be directed toward something: presenting, judging, taking
a position, willing—i.e., the ways we understand the usual divisions of

75. [Editor’s note: Cf. Heidegger’s lecture course, Summer Semester 1925, Ge-
schichte des Zeitbegriffs.| [Translator’s note: Published in English as Martin Hei-
degger, History of the Concept of Time: Prolegomena, trans. Theodore Kisiel (Bloom-
ington: Indiana University Press, 1985).]

76. [Here (Moser, p. 198) Heidegger ends his lecture of Tuesday, 24 November
1925, to be followed by that of Thursday, 26 November, which opened with a 230-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]

77. New edition in the series Philosophische Bibliothek, published by Felix
Meiner. The introduction that precedes this edition is entirely worthless. [Psy-
chologie vom empirischen Standpunkt, 2 vols., ed. Oskar Kraus (Hamburg: Felix
Meiner, 1955; repr. from the 1924-1925 edition: Philosophische Bibliotek, no.
193); translated as Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint, ed. Linda L. McAllister,
trans. Antos C. Rancurello, D. B. Terrell, and Linda L. McAllister (New York: Hu-
manities Press, 1973).]
§10. Anti-critical questions 79
the so-called mental faculties. In Brentano’s words, mental phenom-
ena are distinguished by the way in which something is objective for
them. In presentation, what is presented is objective in one way; in
willing, what is willed is objective in another. The differences between
these ways of being objective or, as Brentano says, of the intentional
inexistence [i.e., mental presence] of the object—these different ways
are the clue to a first classification of the mental. Brentano distin-
guished three ways of mental comportment or intentionality: presenta-
tion—simply having something present; judgment—as acknowledging
or rejecting what is presented; and the phenomenon of taking interest
in something—i.e., phenomena that Brentano also collected under the
heading of the behaviors of love and hate. And to this basic division he
added a fundamental [95] determination wherein he grasped a struc-
tural connection within such intentional comportments: “Every men-
tal phenomenon is either itself a presentation or is founded on one.”
This means that all acts of judgment, along with all acts of taking-in-
terest in something, are possible only because there is given before-
hand a “presented something” in which we take interest or on which
we pass judgment. Consequently presentations, in the sense of pre-
senting something, acquire a distinctive significance. Let that suffice
for Brentano. It should be enough to orient us on the question of what
Husserl used as the foundations for his Logical Investigations.

With intentionality we highlight a structure of the mental that had
already been noted earlier, in the Middle Ages and even among the
Greeks, but without its structure being understood in the clear sense it
has in Brentano. But it is obvious that even Brentano merely empha-
sizes a structure of the mental; he is far from understanding it in its real
meaning. On the one hand, the fact that Brentano emphasized inten-
tionality is something essential; but on the other, it reveals an equally
essential shortcoming that was critically demonstrated by Husserl in his
Logical Investigations, both in the Fifth Investigation and in an appendix
at the end of the whole work, where he dealt with external and internal
perception and with physical and mental phenomena.

Husserl had already received from Brentano a direction for deter-
mining thinking insofar as it is something mental. Thinking is the
thinking-of-what-is-thought, because thinking, as mental, already
necessarily has the structure of self-directedness-to-something. In its
essence, thinking as something mental is already from the start re-
lated to something. It is not first of all something real only, as it were,
within consciousness, and then afterwards, by some kind of mecha-
nism, related to something outside. We must guard against the usual
misunderstandings. [96] Even those who talk about intentionality
have mostly misunderstood it, as if intentionality meant that first of
all the mental is real inside of consciousness, and then an indicative
80 Prolegomenon

direction forward is applied to the mental so as to help it point out-
ward into the external world. No—the mental is first and only this
very self-directedness, and as such it is “real.”

The project, then, was to understand thinking within the horizon of
this structure of the mind and, along with that, to understand what-is-
thought in its thought-ness. But out of this project grew another one:
not just to point out and preserve intentionality by concretely pursuing
and investigating specifically logical behaviors—naming, designating,
presenting, meaning, intuiting, judging—but also, and for the first time,
to properly understand the meaning of intentionality and thereby to
secure the field of mind in its basic constitution. With this phenomeno-
logical project, Brentano was really striving to secure the ground on
which logic, as phenomenological, could make some actual progress in
research by taking its directives from the issues themselves.

The project was to antecedently determine the structure of the field
of the subject matter, and it first of all had to be adequately dealt with
if psychologism’s basic goal was to be possible. Thus, a critique of psy-
chologism has to be a critique of psychology. But as we now see, this
critique of psychology is not about correcting its results or improving
its methods by inventing new instruments or broadening the arena
and the field of investigation by, e.g., making use of child psychology. —
Yes, child psychology is of the greatest importance. Perhaps at a later
date the psychology of the elderly will also be of great import. All of
these are possible and legitimate projects, but they are not the arena
in which the real work of research is to be played out.

No matter how much psychological knowledge we accumulate, it
will never help us clarify fundamental principles unless we pose the
question of those principles right from the start. The accumulation
[97] of such knowledge can go on ad infinitum, but it will never get an
answer to the question of what the mind is, and yet this question is the
concrete, essential question of the science itself. Of course, the path of
science—of any science—mostly proceeds by first taking a naive run-
ning jump into a seemingly limitless field, in which it establishes some
fixed points of relative value. But then it requires some basic philo-
sophical investigation and clarification of that field it wants to investi-
gate. Only then is the science really put on its path—but it stays on that
path only by always understanding how to make the philosophical
move, i.e., to continually question its field and revise its basic con-
cepts. People have completely misunderstood the critique of psycholo-
gism—and Husserl’s in particular—when they have read out of it an
animosity toward experimental psychology. Those kinds of investiga-
tions have their own legitimacy and projects, but they have nothing to
do with philosophy—any more than physics does. So what is needed is
a fundamental reflection on the thematic field of psychology.
§10. Anti-critical questions 81

Some years ago, in 1916, in his inaugural lecture as Rickert’s succes-
sor at Freiburg, Husserl compared the philosopher’s tasks with those of
Galileo in the natural sciences.’ Naturally, the philosophically un-
washed understood these reflections simply as Husserl comparing him-
self with Galileo and presenting himself as someone greater. Now, we
intellectuals are certainly conceited—some more than others, and phi-
losophers above all. They often make this impression because they don’t
talk about the despair that haunts them. But in that lecture (which, like
many others, is not published), it was certainly not Husserl’s intention
to compare himself with Galileo. His purpose, rather, was to show that
people had already experimented with nature long before Galileo, but
that Galileo was the founder of modern natural science only because, as
a physicist, he was a philosopher. The discovery that movement is the
fundamental determination of nature had already been made by Aris-
totle, whom Galileo studied assiduously. [98] Long before Galileo, peo-
ple had employed numerical calculation. What mattered, however, was
not that, but the fact that Galileo asked: How must physical processes be
defined if adequate scientific knowledge of them is to be possible?

Comparing philosophy to Galileo’s project means: As regards
“mind” or “consciousness” (which is indeed the subject of experimen-
tal, numerical calculations), we have to ask what makes mind be mind
and what kind of determination must mind have if we are to be able
to gain an adequate knowledge of it.

Applied to the critique of psychologism, that means: Psychologism is
to be rejected not because psychology wants to force its way into a place
where it does not belong, but because it is the application of a psychol-
ogy that does not understand its own subject matter; not because psy-
chologism merely transgresses a boundary, but because it transgresses
into what is not psychology, and for that reason is confused.

Because of this insight, and guided essentially by it alone, even
Husserl in the beginning titled his phenomenological investigations a
“descriptive psychology,” where “descriptive” did not have the sense of
a narrative versus experimental psychology, or a psychology without
instruments versus one that uses them, or of “desk psychology” versus
laboratory psychology. In Husserl, “descriptive” entails leaving all of
these [supposed contraries] behind and getting back to exhibiting the
issue itself, its field and its structure.

The basic feature of mind is intentionality. This means that the
mind in and of itself is (if we may use this formulation just once) a

78. [This is now published as “Husserl’s Inaugural Lecture at Freiburg im Breis-
gau (1917),” trans. Robert W. Jordan, in Peter McCormick and Frederick A. Elliston,
eds., Husserl: Shorter Works (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1981), pp.
9-17.]
82 Prolegomenon

relation of the real to the ideal. Husserl doesn’t deal with this question
in itself. It surfaces only now and then. His interests are focused above
all on concrete research into the intentional structure itself.

By now it should be clear what the [99] sole authentic meaning of
the critique of psychologism is, and why such a critique must neces-
sarily be a critique of psychology.

b) What positive contribution does the phenomenological inves-

tigation of psychologism make to the question of the concept
and interpretation of the phenomenon of truth?
In the present context, we need not develop what phenomenology is,
in what investigations it first emerged, and what essential discoveries
we owe to it. Instead, from the start we will limit ourselves to the
question: What was established about the phenomenon of truth as a
result of this phenomenological inquiry? In what context does the
phenomenon of truth now emerge? Answering this question will also
make it possible for us to characterize intentionality more precisely.

Up to now, we have met truth as a determination or “property” of
statements. A true statement, a statement to which truth accrues, has
validity and is a truth. This characteristic belongs to the field of valid-
ity and ideal being. But now we ask about the connection of the real
and the ideal—or more exactly, we ask about the phenomenon in
which such a connection is supposedly possible. In our earlier treat-
ment, truth was geared to the statement, and the statement to Adyoc
in a specific, narrow sense. From now on we will simply call it “Adgyoc-
truth.” We will not ask what this Adyoc-truth is in itself, although in
a certain sense we have already determined its location. Instead, we
now look into the phenomenon of the statement, within which Adyoc-
truth supposedly has its proper home.

I now aim the investigation not primarily at the spoken statement
and its meaning—that which is thought and known as such—but at
the act of thinking-what-is-thought, the act of knowing the thing. I
mean this not according to the context or method of Lotze, who pro-
ceeds from what is “in consciousness” as something constantly and
stably given, and goes on from there to the question of objective valid-
ity. Rather, our treatment prescinds entirely from validity and non-
validity, [100] and aims at determining what knowing is at all.

Knowing, as a phenomenological relation, is intentional. This is
part of the definition of its essence. The question is: What does know-
ing direct itself to, and what property does this self-directing have qua
cognitive?

The first question: What does knowing direct itself to? In answer-
ing the “to what?” we neither wish to put a limit on the objects that
are knowable, nor recount that knowing directs itself to houses,
§10. Anti-critical questions 83
streets, baby buggies, people, the sky, geometric relations. Rather, our
question is: What characterizes each of those things insofar as it is and
can be a “toward-which” [Worauf] of knowing? We are asking about
the toward-which of knowing as such—its (if you will allow the
phrase) toward-which-ness [Woraufheit], so as to pin down what is
intended. In order to answer this question from the phenomenon it-
self, let us follow the lead of a concrete act of knowing something or-
dinary that is close to us and familiar.

I follow the lead of my present looking around and about.” To put it
naively, I find that my knowledge is directed to you the audience as well
as the window, the walls, the chalkboard. These very things are what my
cognitive self-directedness intends. My act of knowing does not intend
them as “contents of consciousness.” When I look at the bench over there,
I certainly do not participate in a content of consciousness to which I at-
tribute value, as Rickert puts it. When I see this lamp, I do not apprehend
sense-impressions but the lamp itself and the light; even less do I appre-
hend sense-impressions of red and gold. No, I apprehend the grey wall
itself. Nor am I related to concepts. Even less so do I see something like
an image in my consciousness—an image of the wall, which I then relate
to the wall itself in order thereby to slip out of my consciousness, in
which I am allegedly imprisoned. No, it is the wall itself that my looking
intends. This does not seem to be a particularly deep insight, and in fact
it is not. But it becomes a crucial insight in the face of the erroneous con-
structions of epistemology. Epistemology snaps to the ready, armed with
a theory, and though blind to the phenomenon of knowledge, goes ahead
and explains knowledge—instead of leaving its theory at home [101] and
for once starting by examining what underlies its “explanation.”

As regards currently circulating theories, the crucial thing is, first,
to establish inchoatively the toward-which, the entity itself, and then
above all to hold on to it. Even the unbiased, when asked what it is
they see, are inclined to think they have to say something learned.
And since everyone seems to know that what is first given intention-

79. [Moser (p. 211) records Heidegger as saying in place of the next few lines:
“To put it naively, I find that my perception, in which I am now living, is directed
to you the audience as well as to the wall and the window over there. My act of
knowing does not intend them as ‘contents of consciousness.’ When I look at the
bench over there, I certainly do not participate in a value-laden content of con-
sciousness, as Rickert puts it. When I see this lamp, I do not apprehend sense-
impressions but the lamp itself and the light that burns here in this auditorium.
Even less so am I related to concepts, and least of all do I first know an image [of
light] in my consciousness, with the help of which and with the help of the image
of the wall, I somehow slip out to the wall out there. No, what I know is the audi-
ence, the wall, the window, and the chalkboard themselves.” |
84 Prolegomenon

ally are only ideas, they say they see not the wall but a “representa-
tion” of it. It is not only an inability to take what they directly saw as
what they saw. Rather, it is a matter of not wanting to say what one
has seen, an attitude that is nourished by the dominant prejudices.

If right now, while I am speaking to you about knowledge, I ask
someone to erase the chalkboard, Iam speaking about the chalkboard
behind me. At the moment, I don’t see it—I don’t perceive it. Usually
people say I have only an idea of the chalkboard. What does that
mean? Maybe it means that I am presently directed to my idea of the
chalkboard, and would someone please erase that idea. But obviously
not. Even in “having an idea of,” what I mean is the chalkboard it-
self—the one behind me here in the classroom. When I turn around, I
see it bodily. Even the first time I spoke about it, although I did not see
it bodily, I intended the chalkboard itself.

I may say I have an idea of the chalkboard or only an idea, but that
does not mean that what I am intending is my idea. No, I intend the
chalkboard itself, but now in the mode of merely an idea.®° So we ask
what the difference is between this mere idea of the chalkboard behind
me and my perception of the wall in front of me. At first one might say
that the chalkboard that I’m now speaking about is itself the one that I
intend—that chalkboard itself—but that it is given to me indetermi-
nately insofar as I currently cannot provide the measurements of the
chalkboard, the relation between its height and its breadth, or how its
frame looks, or even whether it [102] has a frame. And therefore, what-
ever is intended in a mere-idea is indeterminate as regards its content,
whereas what is bodily given is determinate, or in any case can be deter-
mined by having a perception of the bodily given.*

* * *
This distinction does hold, but it is not an essential distinction that
would phenomenologically distinguish an idea from a perception in
terms of their respective intentionalities. That becomes immediately
clear if we consider the following case. It quite possible for me to have
an entirely definite idea of the chalkboard, so definite that I could
describe it very exactly and by heart. On the other hand, that wall
over there can be given bodily and yet indeterminately. To use the
chalkboard as an example: When I see the chalkboard while writing
on it, itis given to me in a bodily way. I feel the pressure and resistance

80. [That is, I intend the chalkboard itself—of which, until I turn around, I
directly have only an idea.]

81. [Here (Moser, p. 213) Heidegger ends his lecture of Thursday, 26 November
1925, to be followed by that of Friday, 27 November, which opened with a 750-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
§10. Anti-critical questions 85
of the chalkboard, but it is not given to me in a definite way. When
writing on it, I do not see the chalkboard in its full extension but only
a certain section of it. So, the difference of degree or content is not the
essential distinction that draws the line between an idea and a percep-
tion. The definiteness and clarity of the intended content are not cru-
cial. What is crucial is the fact that in perception the intended thing is
itself bodily there, whether definitely or not, whereas when I have an
idea of it, the thing is certainly intended but is not bodily present.

Now obviously this is only a preliminary description, and we will not
go into it further at this point. But we want to keep this distinction in
the back of our minds in order to understand something essential about
it. We have two cases: having an idea of the chalkboard, and seeing the
wall. One is an idea, the other is a perception. Let’s remember that what
is meant in both cases is the thing itself. We designate perception—
where we have the thing not only “itself” but also “bodily”—as proper
knowledge in the strict sense. Thus knowledge is apprehending and
having the thing itself [103] in its bodiliness. In phenomenology, that is
called intuition: “Apprehending and having the thing itself in its bodili-
ness” is the phenomenological definition of intuition. And intuition is
not limited to the ways of apprehending something by sight in the nar-
row sense of seeing with the eyes. Hearing a piece of music, so long as
the music itself is heard, is also characterized phenomenologically as
intuition, insofar as the apprehending is an apprehension of the entity
itself in its bodiliness. Likewise, pronouncing the judgment “2 x 2 = 4”
is an intuition, so long as in carrying out the proposition explicitly in its
individual positions, we understand what is being said in itself: “Two,
taken twice, is four.” In that case the statement is an intuitive statement
as well as an intuiting statement: it renders present the very thing in-
tended. In this case, of course, the thing intended is not perceptible by
the senses and cannot be seen with the eyes or heard with the ears.
Nonetheless the thing intended is itself to be apprehended and under-
stood in what it is. Here we take the concept of intuition in a very broad
sense, but one that, despite its breadth, is well defined. There is intuition
wherever the thing that is intended in this comportment is bodily pres-
ent. Perception is only one mode of intuition, namely, the mode that is
constitutive for sensibility.

Why is intuition in the sense we have defined it—the immediate
having of something as bodily there—authentic knowledge? Because
intuition delivers the thing itself, and as such it alone properly has the
capability of proving and verifying opinions, cognitions, things said,
propositions. But why is there and why must there be proof at all?

Our knowledge and understanding, which is first and always di-
rected to the world, lives in and draws upon “sense experience.” Al-
though our knowledge remains (within certain limits) constantly re-
86 Prolegomenon

lated to its firsthand lived world,” we mostly do not have things present
“bodily” (in the sense we defined), [104] not even—and especially not—
when we are involved with these things. In the precise moment that I
write on the chalkboard something I am saying, I certainly do sense the
resistance of the board, and the board is bodily given to me. However,
in a strict sense, the board is not bodily present to me as I write. Rather,
Iam present to the words I am writing and their meaning. On the other
hand, of course, (and I just throw this out in passing without going into
it) someone could say that in (another) sense the chalkboard most cer-
tainly is bodily present, precisely in fact when I do not see it, when I just
stand here and occasionally during the lecture write on it. At that mo-
ment, someone might say, the chalkboard is bodily present in a real and
proper sense, in fact in its most proper actuality, when it is used for what
it is. In this way, the chalkboard is disclosed in its proper sense, whereas
when someone who has absolutely nothing to do with the room walks
in and sees it there, the board is not present to him as what it is. I men-
tion this distinction so as to indicate that the concept of the bodily pres-
ent is geared to theoretical apprehension and knowledge. We are speak-
ing exclusively about the theoretical in the present context.

It is not only our firsthand lived world that is by and large not given
bodily, directly, and explicitly. Even less so is the world that lies just
beyond the firsthand world. We have some understanding and some
knowledge of it. We can speak of it and communicate something about
it to others by way of reports and instructions, but only within certain
limits. The limits are not those of memory, which does not apprehend
and hold on to everything. Rather, this knowledge and understanding
of..., this ability to speak about ..., has a limit in itself, even if ev-
erything experienced remains stored up in it in the form of a memory.
The limits of knowledge and speech come to light when they have to
prove themselves as the “knowledge of...” and “speech about .. .” that
they claim to be in their very being as knowledge and speech. We see
their limits when they have to show themselves for what [105] they
are instead of being taken simply as something that might occasion-
ally be of value to others, such as a normative opinion, or an authority
figure’s judgment and pronouncement, or the dictum of an expert.

Thus, although knowledge and speaking communicate something,
or mean something without communicating it, nonetheless they are
what they properly are only because of that whereby they show and
prove their legitimacy: the fact that what they say, they say legiti-
mately—i.e., when they say just how things are. However, the subject

82. [“Seine nachste Umwelt,” where the noun Umwelt does not mean the world
that is physically around one, but rather the lived world of one’s interests and
concerns. ]
§10. Anti-critical questions 87
matter that I know and speak about need not be constantly and im-
mediately present, and I myself need not be present to it. To that ex-
tent our knowledge and speaking to a large degree finally always re-
quires proof. Or let me put it positively. Even though the subject matter
is, in a strict sense, always in need of proof, nonetheless for the most
part it is “step by step” brought to light, passed on, and accepted on the
basis of trust and belief. Thus, proof requires that the thing itself be-
come present and that knowledge of and speaking about it be brought
face-to-face with it. Knowledge of and speaking about must, so to
speak, show their cards to the thing of and about which they make the
claim that it has been “revealed” in the broad sense—i.e., logos, as pre-
viously defined.®’ They must let themselves be checked out by the
thing itself.

But intuition delivers the thing itself. For the most part, knowledge
and speaking that do not stem from the immediate presence of the thing
are largely indeterminate, or “one-sided,” or frequently such that, yes,
the thing is intended, but intended in a completely empty way. In con-
trast with such indeterminate or empty ideas, intuition gives the full
store of the determinations of the thing, or the possibility of having that.
Intuition gives the fullness as distinct from the emptiness of a mere idea
and generally a mere intention. Intuition is the fulfillment—in the sense
of the filling up—of the emptiness of the idea.

But we just heard that there is no essential distinction between the
idea and intuition, only a distinction in the manner of intentional rela-
tion and function. Consequently, the term “fulfillment” has yet another
[106] sense, the primary one, with which it is conjoined. Intuition ful-
fills not simply by giving fullness but also by redeeming the expectation
that in a certain way can be found in the empty idea. In speaking, I
intend something and intend it in this sense: that it can be confirmed at
every moment by a concrete intuition of the thing and the state of af-
fairs Iam talking about—for example, in the lecture itself, by pointing
to the thing in question. Fulfillment now means: a confirmation that
redeems [an expectation], and it indicates an intentional characteristic
that has an essential relation to that of the empty idea.

Now there are various modes, grades, and levels of fulfillment in
intuitions, specifically according to the twofold sense of fulfillment: as
providing fullness in the sense of the full; and as providing fullness in
the sense of confirmation.

We run up against the phenomenon of proof when we realize that
a broad swath of our knowledge and speech is dominated by empty
ideas, and that not even adequate cognition counts as knowing. Rather,

83. [Heidegger is referring to Adyoc / Aéyewv as drNAOvv, “bringing to light, ren-
dering manifest.” ]
88 Prolegomenon

this knowing passes over into the mode of empty intention, and the
empty idea is itself in need of fulfillment. It also has an explicit ten-
dency toward proof, but not in some indeterminate way. Rather, the
content of this knowing has an intrinsic directedness toward the field
that provides intuitive fulfillment.

Now, what does proof mean? It means that what is intended in the
empty idea is brought, just as it is intended, before the very thing that
is intended. But why so? We have put all our emphasis on seeing that
the empty idea intends the thing itself—yes, but in the mode of empti-
ness. This mode is modified when confronted with the bodily presence
of the thing itself.

The [legitimacy of the] empty idea is proven by the thing itself that is
given in intuition and is seen to be identical with what the idea intended.
The empty idea proves its legitimacy by way of the thing itself: by iden-
tifying what it intended with the thing, and by seeing the thing and the
intention as identical. [107] This empty [idea] now sees that what it in-
tended is identical with the thing that is present in intuition.*

In proof, what is emptily intended in the idea and what is intuited
are seen as coinciding. But we must understand this figurative way of
speaking correctly, i.e., in terms of the structure of the phenomena in
question. The coming-to-coincide of the empty idea and the intuited
thing is a matter of intentionality. It is not some sort of mental process
in which, as it were, (a) two disks—idea and intuition—are superim-
posed one on top of the other and coincide; and then (b) some later
reflection establishes that coincidence has taken place, which is taken
as a sign that the empty idea has been proven. No, this proof happens
intentionally, as a matter of directedness-toward-something. That is,
the empty intentional idea itself, in its tendency to fulfillment, lives in
the act of identification, i.e., its nature is to identify itself with some-
thing. It is not simply that unreflected proof precedes reflective proof.®
Rather, as intentional, the empty idea that proves itself knows itself as
proving itself. In enacting the identification as an intentional act, that
very enactment sees the proof and sees that it is the proof of the enact-
ment itself. Proof is not something that gets attached to the empty
idea. Rather, it is a mode of the enactment itself.

When I live in the intuition of a thing as a proving intuition, the act
of intuiting does not lose itself in the thing and its content. Rather, this
content is intuited as bodily present and explicitly as fulfilling, as iden-
tifying-itself-with the empty idea. But this implies that knowing lives
not only in the thing but also with itself insofar as, in performing the

84. [GA 21 (p. 107.1) mistakes sieht (“it sees”) for sucht (“it seeks”); cf. Moser, p.
224.22.]

85. [Literally, “The proof does not simply go before itself.” ]
§10. Anti-critical questions 89
identification, the act of knowing knows how things stand with regard
to its own legitimacy. But the legitimacy of knowing is its ability to be
proven, or its proven-ness in and with the thing. Identification or proof
is an intentional matter. It is carried out; and thereby, without any re-
flection on its part, it attains to a clarification of itself. If this moment of
unreflected self-understanding, which lies in the intentional perfor-
mance of identification, [108] is specially apprehended of and by itself,
then it is to be taken as what we call evidence.

Evidence is the self-understanding act of identification. This self-
understanding is given with the act itself, since the intentional sense
of the act intends something identical qua identical; and thereby, in
and with its intending, it eo ipso clarifies itself.

The essential thing about this apparently primitive (but from a phe-
nomenological viewpoint extraordinarily important) analysis is this:
Evidence is not an act that accompanies proof and attaches itself to it.
Evidence is the very enactment of, or a special mode of, proof.

But insofar as legitimacy makes its appearance in such proof, what
we have said about evidence also means the following. The legitimacy
of knowing is not established after the fact, as it were, in a new act of
knowledge whose content would be that the first act of knowledge (the
one proven in the first place) is legitimate. Rather, the legitimacy of
knowledge becomes visible in, through, and for the intentional enact-
ment of identification. If we do not grasp the phenomenological situa-
tion in this way, that is, if we do not see the phenomenological struc-
ture, we will be inevitably thrown into an absurd conclusion, namely,
that the legitimacy of an act of knowledge is established only when it is
known in a second act of knowledge, which in turn would need an-
other demonstration of its legitimacy, and so on in infinitum. The first act
of knowledge, the true and proper knowledge of the thing, would never
gain legitimacy because a priori and unto infinity it would always be
necessary to know the legitimacy of the knowledge of the legitimacy of
knowledge, and this knowing, in turn..., and so on and on.

The legitimacy of an act of knowledge or of speech is its ability to be
proven or its actually having been proven. (The state of having-been-
proven is the identity of the intended and the intuited, an identity that
is seen in the proof.) As an act of knowledge whose legitimacy can be
provided at any time by an intuition of the thing it intends, it is [109]
true. Truth is the identity of the meant and the intuited.

Truth is identity or sameness, although obviously not in a universal
sense, for not every form of identity is truth. But in this case, truth is
interpreted in terms of identity, and specifically as the identity of the
intended and the intuited.

With this we have now determined truth itself. To put it formally:
Identity is a relation. And truth as an identity is a relation between the
90 Prolegomenon
meant and the intuited. Therefore, truth is the specific relation (of iden-
tity) of a certain “just-as”: something is meant just as it is intuited.

“True-ness” now means the identity of the two parts of the relation.
In this case, true-ness does not mean the actuality and kind of truth
[that pertains to propositions]. Rather, it means what truth itself is: a
recognized identity.

To be sure, we will leave open the question whether this is the final
answer. In any case, this is the determination of truth that we have
been looking for, namely, the interpretation that Husserl provides
through his investigations into knowing as intentional comportment,
or more precisely, knowing as intuition.*®®

c) The connection between propositional and intuitional truth.

The need to return to Aristotle

Let us hold on the point that truth is now determined not primarily in
relation to the proposition, but rather in relation to [110] knowledge
as intuition. We established the first determination of truth as validity,
where truth characterizes the actuality of a true proposition, as Adyoc-
truth, that is, the truth of speech insofar as we take speech in the
sense of the statement. Now we have made a statement not only about
the actuality of what-is-true, but also about the structure of truth it-
self—namely, identity.

We essentially arrived at this second determination of truth by focus-
ing on the act of knowing and specifically on knowing as intuition. This
refers to intuition in the very broad sense that coincides with the Greek
voetv and which is also often indicated as atoOnots. When we take this
second determination of truth also back to a Greek word, we see that
now this second and authentic concept of truth constitutes the truth of
vouc and the truth of intuition, or vovc-truth. I have already remarked
that when I use this perhaps comic juxtaposition of Greek and German
it is to show how these two questions about truth are geared to Adyoc

86. An inherent consequence of the concept of intuition and of the understand-
ing of truth in relation to intuition is that it is not merely “the synthesis of [true]
representations” (according to Kant in his Logic: the representation of a representa-
tion). No, a manifold of intuitions plus their connections is not the only kind of
truth. There is truth even where there is an isolated intuition: the intuition can be
proven (or not) by what it intends. “Strict adequation can bring non-relating inten-
tions as much as relating intentions into union with their complete fulfillments. If
we now consider in particular the field of expressions, we need not concern our-
selves only with judgments (i.e., the intentions and the fulfillments of statements).
Rather, even acts of naming {“single-rayed” ideas} can also achieve their adequa-
tion.” Cf. LU, vol. 2, Sixth Investigation, §39, p. 768 (1913 ed., p. 125). [Husserl
treats “single-rayed” ideas at, for example, ibid., vol. 2, §38, no. 2.]
§10. Anti-critical questions 9]
and vous, two basic starting points of that ancient philosophy in whose
tradition we stand today.®*’

* * *
The question comes up: How is vouc related to Adyos? From the phe-
nomenological distinction we made between the intentional struc-
tures of knowing and its outcome, i.e., the determination of truth [as
identity], what have we gained toward understanding the kind of
truth that we mentioned first, the truth of the proposition?

A proposition has the property of truth. It is true; it is “a truth.”
Why is the proposition the “place” of truth? How can it be the locus of
truth, in fact the first and only authentic locus? Using what was just
said about truth itself, can we shed some light on this issue?

The proposition, taken as a simple statement—‘“This board is black” —
gives expression to an intuition. I do not mean [111] a spoken expres-
sion, a voiced utterance. I mean, rather, that the structure of the propo-
sition as such, whether it is spoken or not, consists of one or more words.
And the structure of the proposition as such articulates the simple con-
tent of what is intuited, namely, the chalkboard. So, the content of the
proposition is the intuited gua articulated, and this content, as articu-
lated, is elevated to a new dimension of “understanding.” We will not go
into this any further. Instead we take up another issue:

The proposition, which gives expression to the intuited by articu-
lating it, can be spoken out loud, and as such can be spoken over and
over again. In all this, the proposition is indeed related, as regards its
content, to the same thing. However, that thing is not given bodily in
the statement.

The intuition is, so to speak, pulled out from under the statement.
Of course, the statement still intends the same thing, and it is true
insofar as what it intends in the manner of empty idea or spoken words
can be proved by reference to the very thing that is meant, insofar as
the thing is bodily present in intuition. At this point the proposition is
nothing but an empty idea or something said. Its content is a merely-
intended. But that means that the proposition, as intended, is one
member of the relation that we determined as truth; it is one relatum
in the relation of identity. It is a member of this specific relation of
identity—in fact it’s the member that can be proven, the one to which
provability accrues.

Therefore, the proposition is true because it is one relational member
of the relation of truth. If this relation of identity between the intuited

87. [Here (Moser, p. 230) Heidegger ends his lecture of Friday, 27 November
1925, to be followed by that of Monday, 30 November, which opened with a 900-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
92 Prolegomenon

and the intended holds, then eo ipso the relatum also holds in the sense
that what is intended can itself now be designated as true. Now we have
a situation that is the very opposite of the situation with Lotze. His treat-
ment took off from the proposition and said: The proposition is valid, is
true, and because the proposition is valid, therefore it is objectively valid
of the thing. But in our treatment, because the proposition is provable in
and by the thing—that is, because it belongs, as a relatum, to the subsist-
ing relation of identity—therefore it subsists and holds, therefore it is
valid. But now we take validity in the sense of the true-ness of proposi-
tions back to authentic truth in the sense of identity. From that, it follows
that the truth of propositions, in the sense of validity, is a derived [112]
phenomenon that is founded on the truth of intuition. Because truth in
the sense of identity subsists, therefore the proposition is valid. When we
speak here of “subsisting,” we mean the term precisely in Lotze’s sense,
for Lotze says: “When relations subsist, we say they are actual.” There-
fore, according to Lotze, relations have their kind of being as subsistence.
But truth is a relation of identity between the intuited and the meant.
Identity as truth subsists, and because it subsists, it is valid for a member
of the relation, a member that can and should be proven.

Now the question comes up about what “subsisting” is supposed to
mean here, that is, the subsistence of identity as such. This is the sub-
sistence of the relation of intended and intuited or, as we formulated it
above, the subsistence of the “just-as” relation. What is the status of
this subsisting? In any case, when we talk about truth as identity, we
are talking about a relation,®* and specifically one that does not subsist
between the thing and its determinations. So it is not the relation that
subsists between, say, the chalkboard and its blackness. The relation
we have in mind belongs to the content of both the intended and the
intuited. We are talking about the relation of the intended proposi-
tional content [“This board is black”] to what is intuited [this chalk-
board]. So there are two issues: (A) In the proposition as such, there
is the so-called propositional relation in which the thing is intended
according to its content; and equally, the content is also present in the
thing that is intuited. (B) But further, in identity taken as truth, there
is also a relation, that of the intended with regard to the intuited. We
call this the “truth-relation” [Wahrverhalt|, because it is a special rela-
tion, a relation of truth.

Now Husserl himself called this relation between the intended and
the intuited a “content-relation” [Sachverhalt], and therefore, in accor-
dance with its own structure, he brought it into line with the other
content-relation, S = P, “This board is black” (the relation of black and

88. [Heidegger identifies Verhalt and Verhaltnis at Moser, p. 236.21-22: “und
zwar einem Verhalt, einem Verhdltnis.” |
§10. Anti-critical questions 93
board), but with the following difference. In the S = P content-relation,
the members of the relation are the thing and the thing’s determina-
tion, whereas in Case B, the relation is between the intended as such
and the intuited as such. Now [113] if you take this truth-relation of
Case B in the very broadest sense, it has the same kind of being as the
proposition—ideal being—and so the identity of the intended and the
intuited can be understood as ideal being! And so, by a remarkable
path, we have come back to where we started.

In the one case, the proposition as one member of the relation is
founded on the intuition-truth of identity, whereas in the other case,
identity itself as a state of affairs has the same kind of being as a propo-
sition or a propositional state of affairs: ideal being. And in all this, the
treatment remains within the bounds of phenomenology. We will
want to keep in mind this connection between propositional content
and truth-content for when, later on, we take up these connections in
more positive analyses.

Now the question comes up: Why is propositional truth connected
in a special way with intuitional truth, as a relatum, a member of a
relation? And regarding Case B, why does intuitional truth take its
truth—insofar as it is understood as identity—back to propositional
truth?®’ Does there finally exist between the two determinations of
truth a more basic connection than the one we showed above, a con-
nection where propositional truth is founded in intuitional truth? In
any case, it follows from our demonstration that the truth of intuition
has priority; and if a more basic connection does exist between the
two, then our inquiry has to reach back behind both of them.

First of all, how is the priority of intuitional truth to be understood?
The answer is that truth is so originally a determination of knowledge
that we can say that true knowledge is a tautology, because knowledge
is knowledge only if it is true knowledge. (False knowledge is like a
square circle. If l understand something wrongly, I do not have knowl-
edge of it.) Knowledge was defined as intuition; but not every act of
knowledge is an intuition. Nonetheless, true and proper knowledge is
intuition, and every other kind of knowledge aims at intuition and has
intuition as its “idea,” i.e., its ideal.

Husserl held to this typically broad and principled understanding of
intuition as the giving and the having of an entity in its concrete pres-
ence. Such an understanding of intuition is not limited to any particu-
lar field or any particular faculty, [114] but rather formulates the in-
tentional sense ofintuition. With this unique and radical understanding
of the concept of intuition, Husserl thought through a great tradition
of Western philosophy right to its end.

89. [Following here Moser, p. 238.3-6.]
94 Prolegomenon

Now we must briefly indicate, first, how it happened that this ap-
parently obvious fact—that truth is patterned on knowledge qua intu-
ition—is connected with some specific and very basic issues, and, sec-
ond, how the outcome of our discussion of intuition-truth and the
related problems leads us to a central question of philosophy and in-
deed of the whole philosophical tradition.

First of all, let us document the importance of Husserl’s basic un-
derstanding of the concept of intuition by citing his formulation of
“the principle of all principles” (formulated for knowledge in general
and for research). Husserl says:

No conceivable theory can mislead us regarding the principle of all prin-

ciples: that every originarily presentative intuition [Anschauung] is a legiti-

mating source of cognition, that everything that is offered originarily (in
its reality “in person,” so to speak) in “intuition” [»Intuition«] is to be sim-
ply accepted as that as which it is given, but also only within the limits in
which it is given there. (Ideas I, 1913, §24)°°
Thus the origin of any research at all and of all knowledge is intuition
as the primary source of legitimacy. It was in reference to intuition
that Husserl formulated the “principle of all principles” of research. At
§136 of Ideas I, Husserl says that “The First Fundamental Form of Ra-
tional Consciousness [is] Originarily Presentative ‘Seeing’,”*'i.e., intu-
ition that presents the subject matter “in person.” Husserl puts the
word “seeing” in quotes here because he meant the word in a funda-
mentally broad sense, and not as limited to visual sight.

Likewise, we can understand Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason—or bet-
ter, all of his philosophizing—only when we see and hold firm to the
fact that for Kant authentic knowledge is intuition. [115] In a certain
sense, Kant formulates the idea of intuition (intuitus) in even more
extreme terms [than Husserl,] and his formulation brings to light the
connection with the Greeks.

In his famous letter of 21 February 1772, to Marcus Herz, in which
he established the problem of the Critique of Pure Reason—or better, of
his whole philosophy—Kant poses the question: “What is the basis on
which rests the relation of what in us we call representation [Vorstel-

90. [Edmund Husserl, Ideen zu einer reinen Phanomenologie und phdnomenologis-
chen Philosophie, I. Buch: Allgemeine Einfiihrung in die reine Phanomenologie (Halle:
Max Niemeyer, 1913), §24, p. 43; corrected edition in Husserliana III/1, ed. Karl
Schuhmann (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1976). The translation here is adapted
from Edmund Husserl, Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomeno-
logical Philosophy. First Book: General Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology, trans. Fred
Kersten (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1982), p. 44.]

91. [Heidegger here cites the title of §136 of Ideen I (1913), p. 282 / tr. 326.]
§10. Anti-critical questions 95
lung], to the object?” (Akademische Ausgabe, vol. 10, p. 124).°* “Repre-
senting” in Kant means, as he himself says, “having an object.” And in
this context, Kant goes on: This representing—having-an-object—is
understandable,

if what in us is called representation were active with respect to the object,

that is, if the object itself were produced by the representation, in the same

way as we imagine divine knowledge as the prototype of things, the con-

formity of the representation to its object would be intelligible.®’
Thus the intellectus divinus, the divine act of knowing, is the highest kind
of representing, of having-an-object. However, God's intellect is not first
of all brought face-to-face with objects as bodily out there. Rather, it
brings the object face-to-face with it in a way that first brings the entity
into being. It goes out ahead of it in such a way that it produces it in the
first place. That is why Kant calls this intellectus the intellectus archetypus
(ibid.) or the imtuitus originarius (Critique of Pure Reason, B 72). We might
compare this with Husserl’s “originary intuition,” except that Kant now
understands the imtuitus originarius in a much more extreme way. It is
called “originary” because it originally gives being to what is intuited in
the intuition. Therefore, divine intellect is the origin (agx1) whereby
things come into being. It makes the intuited be immediately there inso-
far as this intuitus originarius, this intellect, originally thinks the possi-
bilities of things as such and, in and with these possibilities, gives things
the basis on which they can be actual. This intellect does not come after
the entity and then seek it out. Rather, as intellect it really produces it,
makes it possible, in the first place. The divine intellect renders it a pos-
sibility because only if things are possible can they become actual.” Kant
emphasizes the relation between the representation in us and the object.
God is the substantia infinita. The intellectus divinus is the intellect of an
[116] infinite being, whereas a cognitive entity such as the human sub-
ject, because it is created, is finite.®

92. [Kant, Akademie-Ausgabe, vol. 10, pp. 123-130; translated as Immanuel
Kant, Selected Pre-Critical Writings and Correspondence with Beck, ed. and trans. G. B.
Kerferd and D. W. Walford (Manchester: Manchester University Press / New York:
Barnes & Noble, 1968), pp. 111-118, here p. 112. The German Vorstellung can be
translated either as “presentation” or as “representation”; in both cases, as Heideg-
ger points out, it means the mental Having-of-an-object.

93. Conformity. Thomas [Aquinas] always characterizes truth as conformitas, in
fact in the very same context as Kant does here, namely, God’s knowledge.

94. [Cf. Moser, p. 241.8-242.1.]

95. In the Neo-Kantians, the subject is neither human beings nor God. No one
knows who it is. And if we ask, “What is this consciousness in which the world is
constituted?” Rickert answers: “A concept.”
96 Prolegomenon

This merely preliminary determination of the finitude of human
reason shows up in Kant only in passing and usually in a phrase that
he repeats from time to time: “. . . for us human beings, at least.” But
nonetheless, Kant’s entire problematic is contained in this determina-
tion, and we will understand nothing about Kant’s philosophy unless
we keep in mind its crucial effects. As a finite being—substantia finita
(creata) —the human subject has not produced the world that is out
there. Rather, the human subject has been produced along with the
other things and has been placed into the world with them. To the
degree that these things have a relation to intellect, they have it pri-
marily only because they have been created. They have such a relation
of essence only to the intellectus archetypus, since they did not bring
themselves before that intellect but just the opposite. As finite, these
beings cannot, in the primary sense of intuition, produce and there-
fore know each other, but insofar as they are created, whether as mate-
rial or spiritual substances, the path of intuition in the radical sense is
denied to them. Instead they have to announce themselves to each
other. The commercium between these worldly things is based on this
announcing of one for the other. As having been created, they can
merely act upon one another, and they must do so if there is to be any
exchange between them. This acting-upon, when it is done by an en-
tity that can represent things through ideas, is a matter of giving in-
formation about something. With a material entity this announce-
ment regards their kind of being, and it must be addressed to an entity
that is capable of receiving such an announcement. It must be related
to a receptivity, a capability of being given objects that are material.
This ability-to-be-given-something (i.e., intuition) is sensibility [Sinn-
lichkeit|. The basic element of sensibility is sensing, i.e., sensation
[Empfindung]. That’s the basis on which the commercium is possible; it
is that whereby one sensibility can be present to another. According to
Kant, sensations are representations (ways of having objects) “that are
caused by the presence of a thing” (Reflexionen, vol. 2, no. 315). By way
of interpretation, we have to [117] say the reverse: In sensing, sensi-
bility as intuition is [a priori] open to the presence of things.

Knowing necessarily entails that the things themselves are present
in some way and that they announce their presence. This means that
knowledge is necessarily intuition. And for that reason a finite sub-
ject’s knowledge is necessarily founded on sensibility, that whereby
the finite knower can first be “open-to-the-world” at all.

If it is to know at all, the finite being (the human being) must have
an intuitus. But as finite, this entity is denied the intuitus originarius and
has only an intuitus derivativus. For a “true Kantian” who is concerned
only with validities and categories, this fact is a ghastly state of af-
fairs—and interpreting Kant in this way is finally even more ghastly.
§10. Anti-critical questions 97
But Kant was not a Kantian. The current, inchoate discovery of meta-
physics in Kant can be a useful contribution to an objective inventory
of what really is [to be found] in Kant as contrasted with the lopsided-
ness of the Kantians. But even with that, we still have not reached
what is philosophically relevant in Kant. We now have two Kants, and
depending on how they evaluate the metaphysics and the epistemol-
ogy, philosophers will take him one way or the other and will treat
the other side as an unpleasant appendage. But what will then be
needed is not to create some external synthesis of these two “sides,”
but rather to ask why there is this apparent doubling, and where the
necessity, and thus the fundamental limits, of Kant’s philosophy lie.”

So solidly does intuition remain the sense and core of knowledge,
that even thinking gets the meaning of its function from intuition.
[118] Its function is to be simply a means for bringing our knowing
face-to-face with the thing itself. Proof of this is the first sentence that
opens the investigation proper of the Critique of Pure Reason: “In what-
ever manner and by whatever means knowledge may relate to objects,
that by which it is immediately related to them, and to which all
thinking as a means is directed, is intuition” (§1, B 33).”’

* * *
For Kant the one who most exactly and decisively formulated this
concept of knowledge is Leibniz, and I mention Leibniz because he
was of crucial significance both indirectly for Kant and directly for
Husserl. Earlier I mentioned Leibniz when I was characterizing Hus-
serl’s critique of psychologism, at the point where it was a matter of
showing that Husserl, in his critique, maintained the validity of truths-
in-themselves a /a Bolzano, whose position relies directly on Leibniz.
A characteristic treatise of Leibniz is his De cognitione, veritate, et ideis,
“On Knowledge, Truth, and Ideas,” 1684 (in Gerhardt’s edition of
Leibniz, vol. 4, pp. 422-426).* He gives four determinations of knowl-

96. In Critique of Pure Reason (B 51), Kant speaks of the “sensibility of our intu-
ition” as “that kind of presentation that is peculiar to us.” It is not a productive
intuition but a “sensible intuition” that is able to be given something, an intuition
“that therefore is called sensible because it is not original. It is not an intuition
through which the very existence of the object of intuition would be given (some-
thing which, as far as we can see, can belong only to the Original Being). Instead,
our intuition is dependent on the existence of the object and therefore is possible
only insofar as the presentational capacity of the subject is affected by that exis-
tence” (B 72).

97. [Here (Moser, p. 246) Heidegger ends his lecture of Monday, 30 November
1925, to be followed by that of Tuesday, 1 December, which opened with a 620-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]

98. [G. W. F. Leibniz, “Meditationes de Cognitione, Veritate et Ideis” (Novem-
98 Prolegomenon
edge: Cognitio is clara, distincta, adaequata, and intuitiva [clear, distinct,
adequate, and intuitive]. Leibniz emphasizes that if an act of knowl-
edge is simul adaequata et intuitiva [at one and the same time adequate
and intuitive], then it is perfectissima [most perfect]. Thus, intuitive
knowledge is the most perfect. In order to formulate this characteristic
of knowledge as Leibniz understands it, I will list in rough fashion, the
four properties he mentions without going into any special interpreta-
tion at this point.

1. According to Leibniz, an act of knowledge is clear when I have the
thing to be known in a certain way, that is: cum habeo unde rem re-
praesentatam agnoscere possim: when I have the thing that is mentally
intended,”? in such a way that I can recognize the what-is-intended
in and of itself, i.e., when I bring-present to myself the thing that I
meant, in such a way that I can identity what-I-meant with that
thing. Therefore, what constitutes the character of clarity and what
makes knowledge clear is the possibility of re-cognition of the thing,
the possibility of [the] identity [of what-I-intend] with the thing
itself. And [119] if I want to prove that an act of knowledge is clear,
I must take that act of knowledge, and duco in rem praesentem, “I lead
it to the thing that is present.” In other words, I must make present
to myself the very thing I intend.

2. An act of knowledge is distinct when, briefly put, I have a nominal
definition of it—in Leibniz’ words, a definitio nominalis. By that Leib-
niz means the enumeratio notarum sufficientium, the enumeration of
the determinations of the thing that are sufficient to distinguish it
from other things and to determine it as this thing—thus, the enu-
merability of adequate characteristics. And then Leibniz says there
is also distinct, clear knowledge of things that are undefinable, that
have no nominal definition—namely concepts, which are notiones
primitivae [primitive notions]—there is also clear knowledge of a
simple concept. That is, the simple concept is nota sui ipsius: it is the
distinguishing mark of itself; it simply presents itself. It is not reduc-
ible to other determinations, caret requisitis: it lacks determination
by means of another. It is given by means of itself.

3. Leibniz characterizes knowledge as adequate—cum vero id omne quod
notitiam distinctam ingreditur, rursus distincte cognitum est. An act of

ber 1684), in Die philosophische Schriften von G. W. Leibniz, 7 vols., ed. C. J. Gerhardt

(Berlin, 1875-1890), vol. 4, pp. 422-426; translated as “Reflections on Knowl-

edge, Truths and Ideas (1684),” in G. W. F. Leibniz, Selections, ed. Philip P. Wiener

(New York: Scribner, 1951), pp. 283-290.]

99. [Misread in GA 21 (p. 118.29) as representatem; cf. Moser, p. 250.6-7.]
§10. Anti-critical questions 99
knowledge is adequate when, after we have recognized clearly every-
thing pertaining to the things, we now apprehend it in its wholeness,
i.e., we clearly apprehend all of its intelligible features as a whole.

Or again: cum analysis ad finem usque producta habetur: “when the
analysis of a thing’s determinateness has been carried out to the
full,” such that the whole structure of the thing is clear in one
stroke. To be sure, he adds: cuius (that is: cognitionis) exemplum per-
fectum nescio an homines dare possint: “1 do not know whether human
knowledge can offer a case of such adequate knowledge.” Here we
have a hint that such knowledge clearly transcends human capa-
bilities. He says that for the most part human knowledge is a cognitio
caeca, knowledge that is blind and not a visio—not a seeing but [120]
nonetheless an intending. Or he calls it [cognitio| symbolica, which is
nothing but what we have characterized as an empty representa-
tion. I intend something without clearly or adequately possessing
the intended thing itself.

4. And finally:

et certe cum notio valde composita est, non possumus omnes ingredientes eam no-
tiones simul cogitare.
Because concepts are certainly and in the strong sense composites, it is
impossible to adequately grasp the whole of its determinations at once.
Ubi tamen hoc licet, vel saltem in quantum licet, cognitionem voco intuitivam.
But where that is feasible, or at least insofar as it feasible, I call such knowl-
edge {i.e., knowledge given adequately in one stroke} intuitive knowledge.
You must keep in mind that the first three determinations he men-
tions are always preserved and taken up into the final class, that of
intuitive knowledge. If I can have a knowledge in which the object
is itself present—that is, where the knowledge is identified with the
thing itself and where the totality of determinations is present,
worked out, and understood as such—then that knowledge is intui-
tive. So again, intuition, the concrete having of the thing, is true
and proper knowledge.

I note in this regard that in the Ideas, when Husserl himself worked
out and determined the idea of this kind of knowledge—especially in
the context of the various basic kinds of evidence—he did so with an
eye to, and under the essential influence of, these Leibnizian determi-
nations. On the other hand, Leibniz formulated this idea of cognitio
clara, distincta, adaequata, and intuitiva with help from Descartes. What
100 Prolegomenon
Leibniz provides us is merely a more precise determination of the Car-
tesian criterion of all knowledge, namely: clara et distinctio perceptio.

In Descartes, perceptio means the same as the German Wahrnehmung
in the sense of the animadvertere, comprehendere, or grasping the thing
itself. Descartes further distinguishes between two actiones intellectus
[acts of intellect], two different ways our knowing can comport itself:
intuitus and deductio, intuition and deduction. He says that intuition is
more certain than deduction because it is more simple [121] and be-
cause it does not have the thing merely indirectly, by way of the indi-
vidual steps of the proof. Rather, it is with the thing itself. Character-
istic of intuition is evidentia praesens [present evidence]. In intuition
the thing itself is seen, and at the same time one’s seeing of the thing
is itself co-seen and co-known: This is the peculiar self-certitude that
intuition has and that Husserl formulated in his principle of all prin-
ciples. And this Cartesian understanding of the concept of knowledge
(which I will not go into further) goes back in turn to Scholasticism. I
want you to see that this idea—that knowledge properly speaking is intu-
ition—has an even greater importance than came out with Kant, and
to do so I have to talk about it in some other contexts.

The notion that knowledge is intuition or direct seeing is found in
the Middle Ages, not only in the context of what we call mystical,
philosophical, or theological speculation, but precisely in those think-
ers who understood problems in an essentially Aristotelian way. These
gave great importance to argumentation and to indirect, syllogistic
proof—in Descartes’s terminology, to deduction. For a thinker like
Thomas Aquinas, the primacy of intuition shows up precisely in that
context, and in fact intuition is not only the authentic and highest
comportment within knowing but is also the highest possible way of
being human, since in intuition, to the degree the human truly and
properly intuits, he or she is in the presence of the highest entity—the
one that most properly is, namely, God. God is the ens perfectissimum,
the most-perfect entity; and insofar as God is intuited, this intuition of
God is the highest kind of human being, one that humans do not have
on earth but will attain only in heavenly bliss. Which means that the
determination of beatitudo, happiness, is given by intuition. And why
is this intuition—this pure visio Dei or pure intuition of God, this un-
adulterated having-God-present—why is it the highest kind of being
that humans can have? Answer: Because this intuitional comport-
ment [122] no longer looks beyond itself but is fulfilled in itself,
whereas by contrast the second basic faculty of human beings as ratio-
nal beings, the will, precisely as willing something, is by its very nature
still unfulfilled. Willing as such is still directed toward something that
it does not yet possess and that it is not yet. But in the intuition of the
being itself—namely, God—there is complete fulfillment.
§10. Anti-critical questions 101
As proof, a brief text from Thomas Aquinas—chosen almost at ran-
dom, since you can quite easily pile up similar proof-texts. The follow-
ing is from Summa Theologica I-II, question 3, article 5, body of the
text:!°°
Si quidem beatitudo in hominis est operatio, oportet quod sit optima opera-
tio hominis. Optima autem operatio hominis est, quae est optimae poten-
tiae respectu optimi objecti. Optima autem potentia est intellectus, cuius
optimum obiectum est bonum divinum, quod quidem non est obiectum
practici intellectus, sed speculativi. Unde in tali operatione, scilicet in con-
templatione divinorum, maxime consistit beatitudo.
If human happiness is an activity, then it is necessary that it be the best
human activity. But the best human activity is the activity of the best
human faculty in relation to its best object. {In this passage, Thomas deter-
mines what the optima operatio, the best human activity, is. It is the operatio
of the optima potentia, the operation of the best and highest human capabil-
ity, and it is directed to the optimum obiectum; and optimum est divinum: the
best is the divine.}

But the best activity is the intellect {that is completely Greek}, whose best
object is the divine good. But this divine good is not the object of practical
thought, but of speculative thought. {In Scholasticism, speculativus intellec-
tus is also used for theoretice,i.e., it is the Greek Oeweetv.}

Therefore, it is in such activity {of the theoretical intellect, that is, of
pure intuiting in relation to the bonum divinum}—namely, in the pure in-
tuition or contemplation of the divine—that there is true and proper hap-
piness {i.e., the very highest way of being that human beings as such can
have}.

Thomas determines this intelligere—the highest capability human be-
ings as such have—as follows: intelligere nihil aliud est quam praesentia
quocumque modo: “ [intellect is nothing but] the [123] presence of the
knowable to the knowing.” This last understanding of the concept of
knowledge comes from Augustine (who in fact is cited in Thomas’s

100. [(1) GA 21, 122.10 incorrectly cites this text as “III” instead of “I-II,” that
is, as “Tertia pars” instead of “Prima secundae partis.” Cf. Moser, p. 255.12, and
Weiss typescript, p. 61.16. (2) The corpus referred to by Heidegger (rendered here,
“body of the text”) is the division of the article in which Thomas presents his own
position. (3) Heidegger places his German translation at the end of each complete
Latin clause. I gather it, in English after the Latin, and place Heidegger’s running
glosses within the English translation. ]

101. [Theoretice (gen., theoretices) is a rare Latin noun that translates the Greek
(értotN UN) Sewentucr. It refers here to the theoretical or speculative intellect.]
102 Prolegomenon

text), De utilitate credendi, chapter 11. The upshot is again that knowl-
edge is intuition of a here-and-now present thing. And with these
concepts of intuition and of knowledge, which determined Augustine
as well as the Middle Ages, we come up against the concept of knowl-
edge as the Greeks understood it. True and proper knowledge is
Oeweetv—pure, visual relatedness to the thing itself. And for the
Greeks, the highest form of knowing is that which is related to the
being that truly and properly is. You can see that in trying to deter-
mine the Greek view, Iam simply repeating what Thomas said, except
that for Thomas the objectum optimum for the intellect was precisely
Deus as he could be apprehended through biblical revelation, whereas
for Aristotle the proper object of knowledge was that-which-is-eter-
nal—the heavens and the vovc—an4d this object of knowledge does not
have the least to do with Thomas’s God.

You can see the significance of the concept of intuition for the in-
terpretation of knowing. But perhaps it has struck you that in the
course of this characterization, I have not mentioned one perhaps es-
sential figure: Hegel. Hegel’s logic and dialectic seems to break out of
this idea of knowledge—but it only seems to, for far from breaking out
of it, his logic and dialectic is nothing other than the intuitus originarius
raised to a higher power,'” the intuition of the act of thinking and of
its self-intuition, vonotc vonoews. Dialectics is authentically and radi-
cally speculative philosophy (cf. Thomas and Aristotle).

Even from a rough consideration of these connections, it is not sur-
prising that knowledge was and is interpreted as intuition and with
reference to intuition.' In traditional logic it was presupposed as ob-
vious that [124] truth as a characteristic of knowledge is intuition-
truth.'” But the task of a philosophizing logic in the sense that we
characterized it is to ask questions like these: Is this preliminary de-
termination of truth, which goes unquestioned, in fact ultimate and
self-grounded, or not? Is it not finally a prejudgment, even if a neces-
sary one? And why it is a necessary prejudgment? In contrast to this
preliminary determination of truth, what is the more radical question
about truth that has to be asked? And what kind of investigations will

102. [In the sed contra that precedes the corpus of I-II, quest. 3, art. 5, Thomas
cites Augustine at De trinitate I, 8: “contemplatio promittitur nobis, actionum om-
nium finis, atque aeterna perfectio gaudiorum” (Migne, Patrologia Latina XLII, p.
831): “We are promised contemplation, which is the fulfillment of all our actions
and the everlasting perfection of all our joys.” ]

103. [In class, Heidegger said potenzierte (Moser, p. 257.18) rather than erzwun-
gene (GA 21, p. 123.21).]

104. [The following sentence renders Moser, pp. 257-258.]

105. Cf. what we said above (§4) about how logic today is built on something
that is supposedly obvious.
§10. Anti-critical questions 103
be necessary in order to answer that question? This preliminary foun-
dation does not hold as a foundation; rather, it is a starting point for an
inquiry that undermines this foundation.

And now, with regard to the way of determining truth, as we have
shown it to be rooted in the tradition, we inquire into the “why.” Why
is truth intuition-truth? Why is intuition the basic kind of knowing,
and why must truth, understood in this way, be understood as same-
ness (identity)? Why is this truth the truth of propositions, and why
does the actuality of propositional truth have the kind of being that
Plato attributed to the ideas?

Briefly: Why is truth identity? How is it that the being of the true is
timeless validity? We are not posing these questions casually, over
against the treatment of the problem of truth in philosophy heretofore.
Rather, we are asking about the concrete roots of this interpretation of
truth, and about its impact, by going back to its historical origins. That
is, we are going to concern ourselves with history, not out of some inter-
est in antiquity—say, to know what Aristotle thought, to know what his
view of truth was. No, the historical questions that we ask should con-
front us with ourselves and force us to enter our own history. [125]

In order to put ourselves into question, we are critically questioning
back [into history], and in that regard we can clarify the project as
follows. In a radical critique that starts with the whole and goes back
to the whole, we actually have to make the adversary put forth his
most crucial points. But the remarkable thing is always this: In phi-
losophizing, you first have to “acquire” great and creative adversaries
by waking them up. Then you can grow and mature by arguing with
them and establishing the simple outlines of elemental issues, where
“elemental” means both “simple” and “explosive” at the same time.

These questions are elemental in their historical origin. They are
“simple” not just because they are still clumsy questions and haven't
quite been understood, but “simple” because you don’t need elaborate
contraptions to investigate them.

So once again, the two questions:

1. Why is truth interpreted as identity?
2. Why does the true have its being as validity?

We must ask these questions in an elementary way. Therefore, let
us seek help from a place where these questions necessarily became
elementary. And so we come to the first part of our treatment.'°

106. [Here (Moser, p. 262) Heidegger ends his lecture of 1 December 1925, to be
followed by that of Thursday, 3 December, which opened with an 870-word sum-
mary that is omitted in GA 21.]
PART I
a
The problem of truth in the decisive
origins of philosophical logic,
and the seedbed of traditional logic
(focused on Aristotle)
Prefatory remark
[127] As we now discuss this question with a glance back to some
texts of Aristotle, it does not mean that we are trying to give a com-
plete interpretation of those texts. Let’s presuppose such an interpre-
tation as having already been carried out. Then, using our guiding
question, let us simply focus on some individual theses of Aristotle.
Our investigation aims at an original understanding of the problem of
truth and a radical way of solving it, one in which our investigation of
the problem up to now will gain its legitimacy, and in which its posi-
tive content will come to light.

We begin our concrete investigation of the current determinations
of truth by characterizing the truth of propositions. This is hardly ac-
cidental or arbitrary. We do so because according to the traditional
report, the proposition or judgment is the proper place of truth. What
is the connection here?

In §11, we will deal with the place of truth and with the proposi-
tion (Adyoc). Out of those preliminary discussions will come the need
to discuss the basic structure of Adyoc and, in connection with that, to
clarify the phenomenon of meaning.!

§11. The place of truth, and Adyoc (proposition)
The thesis that the proper place of truth is the proposition or judgment
must be understood as an image insofar as “place” is a spatial term,
1. [Here GA 21 omits Heidegger’s presentation of and commentary on the
outline of §§11-15. Cf. Moser, pp. 261-262.]
107
108 Part I

whereas Adyoc is not extended in space. [128] What the expression
means is: the proposition is where truth originally and properly be-
longs. The proposition is what makes truth possible as such. When this
thesis is asserted and taken unquestioningly as the basis of every ex-
planation of truth, it is most often accompanied by a second thesis,
one concerned with content—namely, that the thesis about the propo-
sition as the place of truth was first enunciated by Aristotle. And usu-
ally this second thesis is connected with a third, namely, that Aristotle
was the one who first determined the concept of truth—as the corre-
spondence of thought with things. However (so this thesis usually af-
firms), since this concept of truth cannot stand up against critical re-
flection, Aristotle is the originator of this naive concept of truth.?

To put it another way, we have three theses:

1. The place of truth is the proposition.
2. Truth is the correspondence of thought with beings.
3. These two statements originate with Aristotle.

These three theses, which are widespread today and have been for a
long time, are so many prejudices. It is not the case that Aristotle enun-
ciated the first two theses, nor does he directly or indirectly teach what
these theses assert. He originates theses (1) and (2) only in the sense
that these came into circulation through an appeal to Aristotle that was
based on an inadequate interpretation of him; and it continues unabat-
edly, even today, to determine the conception of the problem.

What does Aristotle say about truth and its relation to Adyoc as
proposition?

In the first place, we must keep in mind the basic point: Aristotle
never determined “truth” as such by going back to the proposition.
Rather, if he ever makes any connection between Adyoc (proposition)
and truth, he does so in such a way that he determines the proposition
through [129] truth, or more precisely, through the ability-to-be-true.
But even this way of putting it is inadequate. The propositional state-
ment is determined by Aristotle as speech that can be true or false.

EotL dé Adyos ATlAG HEV ONMAVTIKOS .. . ATIOHAVTUKOSG 5é OD TAG, AAN’ Ev

TO AANGEver T WevdedOat UTAQExEL. (De interpretatione 4, 17a1-3)

All speech is about something {i.e., in general terms, it means something}

... but not all speech is indicative {i.e., lets something be seen}, but only

2. See H. Maier, Die Syllogistik des Aristoteles (1896), vol. 1, pp. 13-14. The “con-
cept of truth” has its “proper field of action” in the judgment—this [concept of
truth] is the “original” one. The truth of perception and representation is a “de-
rived” and “altered” concept of truth.
§11. The place of truth, and Adyoc 109
speech in which being-true or being-false is present {as the ways of
speaking}.’

This makes it clear in principle that being-true is the distinguishing
feature of a certain kind of speech, the kind that states or asserts some-
thing. The proposition is determined by its reference to truth—not vice
versa, as if truth were derived from the proposition. When Aristotle
emphasizes that the statement is a special kind of speech because of its
reference to truth, we need to understand this correctly. The state-
ment has a reference to the ability to be true or false. Being-true sim-
pliciter and being true or false, are entirely different phenomena.

According to Aristotle this “either/or,” this “either-true-or-false,” is
intrinsic to the proposition. Therefore, for him the proposition cer-
tainly does not have to be there in order for truth to be what it is; and
if a proposition is true, it is true as something that also can be false.

Of course, we have not yet established what this either/or really
means or why the proposition can be characterized in terms of it. We
have not even shown what it is about the proposition that requires that
it be caught in this alternative.

This either/or is what distinguishes speech qua statement and de-
limits it from other kinds of speech. [130] What other kinds? Aristotle
gives a brief indication of those other kinds when he continues the
sentence previously cited:

ovK év ATIAOL dE UTAEXEL OLOV T] EVXT] AdYoS HEV, GAN’ Ov’ AANONS OUTE

Wevdne. (ibid., chap. 4, 17a4)

But being-true-and-false is not present in every kind of speech. A request,

for example, is a form of speech, but it is neither true nor false.

Here Aristotle envisions (although he does not name) a rich variety of
other forms of speech, including wishes, commands, and questions. Ar-
istotle merely mentions in passing that the proper disciplines for study-
ing them are ‘Qntogucr 1 TtoutuKcr, rhetoric or poetics.* Sentences like
“Please pass me the scissors” or “Get off this land!” or “Was there an-
other storm today?” are not statements, because they are neither true
nor false. This division that Aristotle makes within the various forms of

3. “Enuntiativa vero non omnis [oratio], sed in qua verum et falsum inest”;
Boethius, Commentarium in librum Aristotelis Peri hermeneias, vol. 2, chap. 4, p. 95
(ed. Besarrion, p. 324); i.e., “in which there is truth or error,” Eugen Rolfes (p. 4).
The anodatveoOat is emphasized in Poetics 6, 1450b10-12.

4. 6 d8 ATIOMAVTUKOS THS VV Deweiac (chap. 4, 17a6): “However, the object or
theme of the investigation we are now conducting is the indicative-declarative
[aussagende] Adyoc.”
110 Part I

speech has not always been maintained. In fact, it has been strongly
challenged—by Bolzano, for example,’ and in a certain sense even by
Husserl—to the effect that even sentences expressing wishes, commands,
and questions are thought to have the property of statements.

The question is still debated, and yet anyone can see that getting a
clear resolution of the question is a basic presupposition [131] for any
scientific grammar.® Here we will not pursue the question as a matter
of controversy. Instead, we will try to see whether discussing the phe-
nomenon of truth can lead us to a foundation on which we can at least
correctly pose (if not resolve) the much-debated question about the
expression of objectivizing and non-objectivizing acts. Let us simply
get a bit clearer on the distinction Aristotle established.

What does it mean to say that being-true and being-false are not
present in an evxn, a request? If I say, “Please give me the scissors that
are on the table,” when in fact there are no scissors on the table, what
I say does not correspond with what is the case. My speech is objec-
tively false. 1am deceived, and my utterance expresses that deception.
That act of speech says something false—but is my request false? Obvi-
ously not. Is it true? No, not that either. Why is it neither one nor the
other? That becomes clear as soon as we really translate—i.e., inter-
pret and express in our own language—the two Greek sentences we
have quoted, in which Aristotle delineates speech qua propositional
statement. Let us translate [De interpretatione, chap. 4,] 17al.

Not all speech is indicative, i.e., shows something, but only speech in

which being-true or being-false is present.

That translation fails to convey the degree of understanding that the
Greeks had of that Greek sentence, due to the indeterminateness of the
words “being-true” and “being-false.” When understood correctly and
literally (in the strict sense of that word), the Greek word for “being-
true”—aAnOevetv—means to uncover in the sense of unveiling some-
thing, removing the hiddenness from something. An adequate word for
that is “to un-cover”—not in the strong sense of bringing something to
light for the very first time, but in the more general sense of unveiling
something that is still veiled or of again unveiling that which has again
become veiled-over. In short, it means to uncover what has been cov-
ered until now, or that has become covered again. Likewise the opposite
concept, Wevdeo8at, [132] does not meaning “being-false.” If we trans-
late it that way, the meaning of the sentence remains obscure. Vevdeo0ar

5. See his Wissenschaftslehre, vol. 1, §22, pp. 87ff.

6. For example, unless this question is clarified, the optative and the impera-
tive cannot be conceptually understood in contrast to the indicative.
§11. The place of truth, and Adyoc 111
means: “to deceive,” for example, to deceive another person by giving
him not what he expects to see but something else that looks like it. In
deceptive speech, therefore, I put into words not what I have in mind but
something different. The person expects to hear what I have in mind,
but I say something else. So speech can either uncover or misrepresent
what Iam speaking about. To show that the concept of pevdeo0at is the
opposite of “to uncover,” we translate it as “to cover-over.” This transla-
tion is all the more justified by the fact that a false sentence need not be
uttered by a “false person,” someone who is insincere and intent on de-
ception. The other side of the coin is that every false statement uttered,
even if uttered without the intent to deceive, is objectively misleading, a
misrepresentation, because as a statement about something, it automati-
cally gives the appearance of saying something about that thing, whereas
in fact it covers it over and deceives.

Let us try to understand the issue more adequately by translating
the sentence as follows:

The only speech that indicatively shows something, {and thus is a state-

ment,} is speech in which uncovering or covering-over is present.
The Greek word that we translate as “is present,” is UmaexeEtv, “to be
there.” But in this case it does not have the meaning it often can,
namely, “occurring” in the quite broad sense of “there is something,”
as if Aristotle meant to say: “Only such speech is indicative in which
uncovering and covering-over occurs” —as if covering and uncovering
could sometimes occur, and sometimes not. Here, instead, U7maQxEtv
has the weighty sense of the philosophical concept that is used by Ar-
istotle: Umaexew means “being there a priori,” “underlying something
in such a way that everything else is sustained by this thing that is
there a priori.” For that reason Boethius translates the Greek UmaQxEtv
in an entirely correct way as “in-esse,” “being-within-[something],” in
this case: “belonging to the very essence of speaking.” [133] Therefore
we have to translate it as follows:

Only that speaking in which uncovering or covering-over sustains and

determines the authentic intention of the speaking is an indicative {state-

ment} that shows something.
Now the second part of the text (17al) becomes clearer, and we can
understand the distinction Aristotle has made.

Not all ways of speaking are primarily oriented to uncovering and cover-

ing-over. For example, a request is speech, but as a request, it neither un-

covers nor COvers-Over.
112 Part I
A request does not have the sense of uncovering or covering-over.’

* * *
So uncovering and covering-over are what determine the Adyoc as
indicative showing-something-as.* A sentence gets its determination
as a statement by uncovering and covering-over. The essence of a
proposition is atodatveoO8at— showing a thing azo: in terms of itself.
The meaning of an assertion as a form of speech is to show (OnAovv)
something as. That Adyoc is amtodavtuKcds whose distinctive possibil-
ity as an act of speech is to show something as, whose mode of expres-
sion can bring something into view—that is, only if it is an amddavotc,
a “statement,” or more exactly, an “indicating ...as.” However, we
will stick with the more normal word “statement,” but will give it the
meaning that is contained in the phenomenon of this kind of Adyoc.
What a statement says about something is drawn from that thing it-
self, so that in this kind of speech, what the speech is about comes into
the clear, becomes available for comprehension. In the expressed state-
ment, therefore, the very thing it indicates has become accessible and,
as it were, preserved [verwahrt]. This sense of statement must be kept
in mind in the future as the primary sense.

In our understanding, what is asserted in a statement is: “the chalk-
board in its being-black.” But in addition and above all, a “statement”
is understood only as “predication,” that is, asserting that a “predicate”
belongs to a subject. A subject is that to which we give a determina-
tion. In this instance, therefore, “statement” has the meaning of “an
act of determining.” A statement in this sense has an essential relation
to statement in the first sense: an act of determining is always an act
of showing something as, and it is possible only as such. Whether
every statement as such also determines, is a question that we shall
have to leave open. It is a question that we will [134] explain in the
following paragraphs, when we investigate the full structure of
amtodavoic. So we have what is asserted and the act of asserting as
“predicating,” e.g., “being-black.” The statement as determination is a
bit restricted with respect to statement in the first sense.

In the third place, a “statement” can mean the same as a “commu-
nication,” i.e., the expression of something. This is connected with
the first meaning and consequently with the second. But unlike the
first, this one means not so much indicating something as, showing it

7. [Here (Moser, p. 274) Heidegger ends his lecture of Thursday, 3 December
1925, to be followed by that of Friday, 4 December, which opened with a 680-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]

8. [A declarative sentence (Adyoc) never simply “shows something,” but al-
ways “shows something as something.” I occasionally indicate this by putting “as”
in brackets after “shows.” ]
§11. The place of truth, and Adyoc 113
as such, as it does communicating a state of affairs as one that has
been indicated. The expression of the statement or indication (i.e., what
is stated) is now not only “the chalkboard in its blackness” (i.e., what
was indicated and brought into view), nor is it merely “black-ness”
(i.e., the predicate qua predicated). Rather, it is the blackness of the
chalkboard as expressed, the spoken-forth-ness of what has been indi-
cated, and indicated in the matter of predication. In living speech, an
anodavots is a statement in all three senses of the word at one and
the same time. These three meanings are not just empty or invented
distinctions within the meaning of “statement.” No, each of them
refers to a specific structural moment of Adyoc. The various determi-
nations of “statement”—1. showing, 2. determining, and 3. commu-
nicating—are issue-oriented directives for studying the phenomenon
itself.

In laying out the three meanings we have also indicated (although
only roughly) their interrelation. The first one makes the other two
possible. The basic movement is not from language to speaking but
from speaking to language.’ In fact, language and speaking are not
distinguished at the start; and the first explorative questioning of that
started from both sides at once, that of language and that of speaking,
and oscillated between the two with no fixed point of reference.

That point of reference is “truth” understood as uncovering, as in-
dicative showing-as. In order to be understood as amtodpavotic, speech
needs to be brought back to the act of uncovering. [135] The proposi-
tion is not the place where truth first becomes possible, but the re-
verse. The proposition is possible only within truth. However, that
requires that we understand the phenomenon which the Greeks
meant by “truth” and which Aristotle was the first one to capture in a
clear concept. “The proposition is not the place of truth; truth is the
place of the proposition.” At first glance this formulation may seem
forced and dogmatic. But later we will show its complete legitimacy.

In this regard, we must keep in mind that the proposition has a
peculiar relation to truth since, as propositional truth, it is necessarily
caught in an either/or. It is the kind of speech that is neither true as
such nor false as such, but can be either true or false.

Our question now is: What makes this either/or accrue of necessity
to the proposition as a statement? What exactly is the structure of a
statement, and why is that structure necessarily qualified by this
either/or?

9. This is important because all of Greek logic, and consequently our own
logic right up to today, takes its orientation from this, the spoken sentence.
114 Part I
§12. The basic structure of Adyoc and
the phenomenon of making sense

The question we have just formulated could also be put this way: What
makes Adyoc able to be false, i.e., able to cover-over at all? The indirect
outcome of our explanation thus far is that Adyoc is not through-and-
through true, i.e., uncovering. Rather, it uncovers only insofar as it can
also cover-over. In a somewhat exaggerated formulation: The statement
can be true (can uncover) at all, only because it can also cover-over— only
because, as a statement, it operates a priori in the “as.” The statement’s
uncovering is an uncovering that does not cover-over. That is, what struc-
tures the truth of statements is in principle the same as what structures
falsehood. To state the matter as a whole: The possibility of being true or
false—which is the essential feature of any statement—is as such neces-
sarily grounded in one and the same structure of Adyoc. [136]

Let us now pose the question in an extreme form: What is the struc-
tural condition in Adyoc that accounts for the fact that it can be false?
The answer will shed light as well on the condition of the possibility of
the truth of statements, i.e., on the kind of uncovering that goes with
Aoyoc. Aristotle says:

TO YAQ Wevdocs év ovvOéoEL det. (De Anima II, 6, 430b1)

Covering-over is {as such} always a “synthesis.”

He likewise says:

0 d€ PEevdtg¢ Adyos OvOEVdsg ~oTLV ATAWS Adyoc. (Metaphysics V, 29,

1024b31)

Whenever speech covers-over, it is never non-synthesizing speech about

something.
Or,

Wherever there is covering-over, there is necessarily a “synthesizing”

within the structure of the statement.

What that means only seems to be clear. But what we said earlier im-
mediately allows us say further that where there is uncovering— “truth” —
there is also necessarily a “synthesizing,” because the statement’s uncov-
ering is an uncovering that does not cover-over. But that does not mean
itis anon-synthetic statement, supposedly because synthesizing is found,
necessarily and structurally, in covering-over. It only says: Every covering-
§12. The basic structure of Advyoc 115
over is necessarily synthetic—but not every synthetic act of speech is
necessarily one that covers-over. It can also uncover. But not every un-
covering is synthetic, only the uncovering in statements:

ev Oc S€ KAL TO WEvdOC Kal TO AANVEc, OVVOEDIC TI¢ NON VONUATWV WoTtEO

év Ovtwv. (De anima II, 6, 430a27-28)

Nonetheless, where covering-over as well as uncovering is possible, there

is already some kind of synthesis of the things intended, of what is repre-

sented in representations, as if they were one.
Accordingly, synthesis is the foundation of falsehood and truth. That is,
here we have the kind of truth in place of which there could also be
falsehood. In other words, here we have the truth of statements. Now:

EVOEXETAL OE Kal SLAigeoty havat TavtTa. (De anima III, 6, 430b3)

But all of these can also be called a “taking-apart.”
That is: every oVv@eotc [act of synthesizing] is likewise a dtatgectc
[act of separating], and vice versa. All synthesizing is separating, and
all separating is synthesizing. Therefore, in the crucial passage where
his theme is AOdyoc as statement, Aristotle can summarize the determi-
nations given up to this point [137]:

TLEQL YAQ OVVOEOL Kat dtatgectv EOTL TO EVdEC TE KAL TO AANVEc. (De inter-

pretatione, chap. 1, 16a12)

In the sphere of synthesizing and separating, covering-over and uncover-

ing are [always] found together.’°

* * *

Clearly, with putting-together and taking-apart we have found some-
thing that constitutes (or at least co-constitutes) the basic structure of
Adyos as statement. But how are we now to understand this putting-to-
gether and taking-apart (oUvOeotc-diaigeotc), and how might we apply
it to the entire phenomenon of a statement? It is certainly not hard to
find examples. Take the statement, “This chalkboard is black.” Here we
have an uncovering statement and a synthetic statement. Therefore, ac-
cording to our explanation, we can say the statement is true—i.e., it con-
tains within itself the very thing, now uncovered, that it intends. It shows
the thing about which it makes a judgment just as that thing is in itself.

10. [Here the lecture of Friday, 4 December 1925 draws to a close, to be fol-
lowed by Heidegger’s nineteenth lecture on Monday, 7 December. |
116 Part I

Again, according to what we said, this statement, in order to be capable
of being-true or uncovering, must somehow share a priori in the structure
of ovvOectc-dtaigeoic. The statement is a synthetic one: that’s obvious
from the linguistic form of the sentence. In this statement “black,” or “is-
black,” is synthesized with “chalkboard,” and because it does synthesize
the two, the proposition is itself true. However, precisely because it enacts
a synthesis, this proposition runs the risk of being either true or false.

The opposite statement, “This chalkboard is not black,” covers-over
and misrepresents the thing to which it refers with the words, “This
chalkboard.” It does not allow the intended thing to be seen as what it
is. The statement is false; and it has the structure of separation. With
the word “not” it separates blackness from the chalkboard, and pre-
cisely because of that separation, the statement is false.

The upshot of this first example is as follows: ovvOeotc (linking to-
gether) is the condition of the possibility of uncovering (truth), and
dtatgeotc (separating) is the condition of the possibility of covering-over
(falsehood). Synthesizing and separating: these are what make possible
the distinguishing property of the proposition, namely its ability to be
true or to be false. And at the same time, this lets us indicate some struc-
tural relations in the proposition that have not been noted up to this
point. [138]

The first statement is a matter of synthesis: it attributes blackness to
the chalkboard. Aristotle calls such an attribution katadacic, which
gets interpreted and translated as “affirmation.” The second statement
says that something does not pertain to the chalkboard; it is called
amtodaotc, “denial” or “negation.” So it is not simply that synthesizing
and separating are the condition of possibility of trueness and false-
hood. In addition, by focusing on synthesis we came up with affirma-
tion. And by focusing on separation, we came up with negation. In
fact, earlier we saw that attribution and denial are the two forms into
which simple, original statements are divided:

EotL dE Eig TEWTOS AdYOS ATIOPAVTLKOS KAaTApACLCG, Eita ATODaOLC.. (De in-

terpretatione 5, 17a8)

The kind of speech that indicates something {i.e., the kind of speech that

is a statement} is, first and foremost, affirmation, and then denial.

That seems to generate the following simple chart, where sentences
fall into one of two types:

either or

ovvO0eots (synthesizing) dtiaigeoic (separating)

aAnGéc (uncovering) evdoc (covering- over)

Kkatadaotc (affirming) aTtodaots (denying)
§12. The basic structure of Adyoc 117
But this schema is altogether too neat to capture the interrelations of
these phenomena. We can see that the chart misses the mark once we
stop focusing on what Aristotle said about oUv@eot<s and dtaigecic, and
instead simply look at a couple of statements that we ourselves might
make.

Leave aside for a moment the structural features of oUVvOeotc-
dtaigeotc, and consider just the other two pairs, AAnVEc-pevdoc (UNCOV-
ering, covering-over) and katadaoic-aTtodaois (affirming, denying).
The chart says that affirmative statements uncover (i.e., are true)
whereas statements that deny cover-over (i.e., are false). But no one can
seriously hold this position, namely that in order to always speak the
truth, one would simply have to avoid negative statements. No, there
are negative statements that are also true (uncovering), just as there are
affirmative statements that cover-over. For example, the statement
“This chalkboard is gray” is an affirmation—it attributes “gray” to “this
chalkboard” —and yet it covers-over. On the other hand, the statement
“This chalkboard is not gray” is a denial or negation, and yet it is true:
it uncovers. That gives rise to problems and second thoughts. [139] Does
the second statement show the chalkboard? Yes it does. However, it
shows the chalkboard as what it is not. Then can we uncover and see
something by showing it as what it is not?

At any rate, the second statement doesn’t simply assert nothing about
the thing it names—as would be the case if we claimed that “The chalk-
board is not ambitious.” The statement, “The chalkboard is not gray,” in
fact does assert something, because the chalkboard could very well be
gray. Our uncertainty about statements like these comes from the fact
that the statements are artificially stripped of any real context in which
they might be made. They are put forward in a form in which we hardly
recognize them. (This is a problem that as a matter of principle should
be explained in logic.)

As a matter of fact, the determinations in the above chart overlap.
An uncovering statement can be either affirmative or negative, in just
the way that a statement that covers-over can be. Likewise, an affir-
mative statement can either cover-over or uncover, just as a negative
statement can do.

But what does this mean for oUv@eotc and dtaigectcs, which are our
primary concern? Affirmation is not co-extensive with uncovering,
and denial is not co-extensive with covering-over. Then is affirmation
(attribution of the predicate to the subject) co-extensive with synthe-
sis? And is negation (denying that the predicate fits the subject) co-
extensive with separation? But let us remember what Aristotle says at
De anima III, 6, 430b3: “All this {every oUvOeotc} can also be called a
dtaigectc.” That is, attribution as linking-together is also separation;
and denial, as separation, is also a linking-together. Therefore: (1)
118 Part I

Every affirmative statement is never simply synthetic. (2) When it
comes to true and false, it is not a matter of either/or (i.e., either synthe-
sizing or separating). Rather, every affirmative statement both synthe-
sizes and separates, and every negative statement both synthesizes
and separates. And there is a further consequence: (3) Since every af-
firmative statement can be either true or false, it is not the case that
uncovering = synthesizing and covering-over = separating. Rather,
every uncovering statement and every covering-over statement both
synthesize and separate. In other words, a structure of every statement
qua statement is that it synthetic-and-separating. Therefore, this struc-
ture obtains in every statement, and it obtains prior to affirmation and
negation, attribution and denial—and it does so absolutely. This is the
case [140] not, as one might allege, because attributing-to is primarily
synthesis and only secondarily separation, or that denying-of is pri-
marily separation and only secondarily synthesis. No—attribution is
no more a matter of synthesis than it is of separation, and denial is no
more a matter of separation than it is of synthesis. What all of this
means is that synthesis and separation are found at a level that is prior
to attribution and denial, and are the condition of the possibility of
attributing-to and denying-of, just as they are the condition of the
possibility of covering-over and uncovering.

What have we gained by this discussion of the various forms of sim-
ple statements with regard to ovv@eot<g and diaigeotc? As concerns an
insight into their very structure, it has achieved nothing. On the con-
trary, that structure has gotten even more obscure and puzzling. The
reason, as we have seen, is that synthesizing and separating are not two
possible forms of statement, so that statements would be divided into
one or the other. Rather, they belong to every statement as such and
therefore go together essentially and therefore are a matter of a unified
phenomenon that originally constitutes the unity of a statement as
such. So even though the structure itself is not yet entirely clear, none-
theless the result is not merely negative. It is also positive insofar as we
have gained a reference point and a direction for understanding this
linking-together that is a separation and this separation that is a link-
ing-together as a unified phenomenon. The phenomenon is not some-
thing cobbled together from these two forms, something that leads, at
best, to a merely extrinsic understanding of the unity.

But there was a further result: What really led us in the first place
to that simple chart that ordered ovVvOeotc, aANVEc, KaTAdacIc, and
their opposites? We said that synthesis is already manifest in the lin-
guistic form of the sentence qua unified sequence of words and in its
true enactment. Words are not just strung along, but are also synthe-
sized into the whole of a verbal manifold. We focused on the expressed
sentence, (although here, too, in a less than precise way). But on a
§12. The basic structure of Adyoc 119
closer look it already became clear that even in the linguistic form the
ovvOeoic-dtaigecic schema could not be carried through.

“The chalkboard is not black,” is indeed a separation. [141] But are
the words in this sentence any more separated or any less synthesized
than in “The chalkboard is black”? The “not” that separates and de-
nies does not leave the sentence in pieces. Rather, as a moment in the
statement, the “not” itself is possible only because “blackness” has been
related to and synthesized with “chalkboard.” As easy and seductive
as it is to focus on the expressed sentence and its linguistic form, we
must avoid that. Or whenever it enters the field of logic, we should
treat it merely as proof of how speaking qua statement can become an
expressed statement (and this particular expression), and of how much
linguistic formation is determined by specifically logical moments
concerning speech as the showing of something as.

But we must be just as careful with “attribution” and “denial,” as if
these forms of expression were almost abbreviations of “synthesis”
and “separation.” We now know that synthesis and separation cannot
be divided and lined up with affirmation and denial. Rather, they are
themselves inseparable in every affirmation and every denial.

In short, it is a matter of understanding a phenomenon that in itself
is both synthesis and separation, one that is prior to linguistic relations
of expression and to their attributions and denials, a phenomenon
that, on the other hand is what makes it possible that Adyoc can be
true or false, revelatory or covering-over.

But again, where can we get some guidance for understanding what
constitutes the basic structure of Adyoc qua statement? Aristotle him-
self, apart from an important indication (which is, again, all too vague)
fails to provide the information. He and the Greeks, as well as the later
tradition, neglected to really inquire into this structural phenomenon.
Linking-together and separating are the structures that basically clarify
what the statement or judgment is. Unfortunately the question of ana-
lytic and synthetic judgments has gotten mixed in with this interpreta-
tion so that the confusion is huge [142]—and in the apparently per-
fected and secure science of logic basically nothing has been clarified.

To stay with Aristotle for a moment: he never got away from his
orientation to speech. For the Greeks that would be impossible. And
yet, as we will soon see, his work on the structures of oVvOeotcg and
dtaigeotc, and on their relations to the true and the false and to
Katadaocic and anodacic, are certainly not as clear as the way we
worked them out above. Of course, once we get clear on the ovv@eotc-
dtaigeoic structure and understand it in its origin, we can understand
certain indications that Aristotle gives for clarifying this structure.

The problem has been posed here and elsewhere in a less than ex-
plicit way. Nonetheless we should not allow an essential indication, as
120 Part I

obvious at it seems, to slip away from our understanding. The usual
interpretation fails to exploit Aristotle’s hint that the basic function of
Aoyos is aTtodacic—indicative speech that shows something. This
merely says more pointedly what Plato had already nailed down and
what was part of the Greeks’ basic understanding of Adyoc. The func-
tion of speaking is dnAovv, making things manifest.

Have we gotten anywhere with this, especially regarding the ques-
tion about the unified phenomenon of oVvOeotc-dtaigeoic, which pre-
sumably makes statement possible in the first place?

In the Sophist, Plato asks: What makes a plurality of words that fol-
low one after the other form a Kotvwvia, an ensemble in which the
words are present to each other? The answer, he says, consists in the
fact that Adyoc is Adyoc ttvdc: speaking is speaking of and about
something. The unity is constituted and becomes intelligible from
what is being spoken about.

The question we now pose is that of the unity of a succession of
words. We have not yet arrived at the statement as something expressed.
[143]

a) The as-structure of our primary way of understanding:
the hermeneutical “as”

We now inquire into a structure of Adyoc that first makes Adyoc as
such possible. Will Plato’s indication help us along here, or that of Ar-
istotle? Adyoc is the act of indicatively showing the thing being spo-
ken about, which earlier, when we were clarifying the concept of
statement, we characterized as the statement’s subject matter [das
Woriiber]—as contrasted with what the statement predicates [das
Wovon] about that subject matter. In actually showing and determin-
ing something, we grasp the subject matter. Or more precisely: the
subject matter is already present, and from that present thing the
statement—the blackness of the chalkboard—is lifted out and high-
lighted, as it were, not as a new object but at first only in the sense of
making the subject matter more accessible as what it is.

But in order for something like a predicative highlighting and deter-
mining to be possible, the subject matter must have already become ac-
cessible. In the case we have been discussing, the usable thing in front of
us must be already familiar, already accessible. For example, it might be
familiar in terms of the service it can render, what it can be used for, the
use for which we meet up with it at all—in a word, its “for-writing-on.”
This end-for-which [Wozu] is itself already comprehensible and known,
as is the thing itself that is there for this purpose and as this: the chalk-
board. (We restrict our investigation to statements about things in the
lived world, postponing discussion about whether this is proper or not.
Later it will become clear that this limitation is not a limitation at all.)
§12. The basic structure of Adyoc 121

When the chalkboard is perceived in its character as the subject mat-
ter of the statement, our having-it-present includes an experiential
knowledge of its current suitability-for. The thing’s suitability-for is un-
covered insofar as we already live in a disclosure of it.

As regards its basic meaning for us as a concerned being-unto-the-
world, use is only a more accessible form of meaning. Existence is, in
itself and by its very nature, world-open, open for the world; and cor-
responding to that, the world is dis-closed, opened-up. The primary
form of that disclosedness is the opening up of whatever thing is being
questioned. [144] Every form of speaking about things is, as an onto-
logical comportment of existence, already grounded in existence as
world-open. That is, all speech speaks about something that is some-
how already disclosed.

Speaking indicatively about something—“this table here,” “that
window over there,” “the chalk,” “the door”—already entails [their
prior] disclosure. What does this disclosure consist in? Answer: the
thing we encounter is uncovered in terms of the end-for-which of its
serviceability. It is already posited in meaning—it already makes sense
[be-deutet]. Do not understand this to mean that we were first given a
something that is free of meaning, and then a meaning gets attached
to it. Rather, what is first of all “given”—and we still have to determine
what that word means—is the “for-writing,” the “for-entering-and-
exiting,” the “for-illuminating,” the “for-sitting.” That is, writing, en-
tering-exiting, sitting, and the like are what we are a priori involved
with. What we know and learn when we “know our way around” are
these uses-for-which we understand it."

Every act of having things before our eyes, every act of perceiving
them, is held within this [prior] disclosure of those things, a disclo-
sure that things get from a primary making-sense-of-things in terms
of their what-they’re-for. Every act of having something before our
eyes and perceiving it, is in and of itself a matter of “having” some-
thing as something.’ Our directional being-unto-things-and-people
functions within this structure of “something as something.” In short,
it has the as-structure. However, this as-structure is not necessarily re-

11. A chalkboard, if it were unintelligible, would, as such, not be present here.
Unless it were understood as for-writing-on, it would be hidden. The same with a
door unless it is understood as for-entering-and-existing. These things are intel-
ligible because we ourselves move among and operate with them, although we do
so in such a taken-for-granted way that we forget this state of affairs in its basic
structure as constituting these things. [GA 21 takes this footnote from Heidegger's
twentieth lecture on Tuesday, 8 December 1925 (cf. Moser, p. 307.19), and inserts
it at this point in the nineteenth lecture of Monday, 7 December.]

12. This “having” is not a matter of merely observing. It is meant entirely in the
sense of our everyday dealing with things.
122 Part I
lated to predication. In dealing with something, I make no thematic,
predicative statements about the thing.”

* * *
Therefore, we must explicitly emphasize the pre-predicative nature of
the as-structure, because otherwise we might rely on the readily avail-
able linguistic expression and think that this as-structure is primarily
and properly given in the form of a simple propositional statement
such as “This chalkboard is black”—that is, in a thematic discussion
[145] of this chalkboard as black.

Yes, we certainly can interpret the sentence that way, but in doing so
we have to understand that, in the first and authentic instance, this “as”
is not the “as” of predication qua predication but is prior to it in such a
way that it makes possible the very structure of predication at all. Predi-
cation has the as-structure, but in a derived way, and it has it only be-
cause the as-structure is predication within a [wider] experience.

But why is it that this as-structure is already present in a direct act
of dealing with something? The most immediate state of affairs is, in
fact, that we simply see and take things as they are: board, bench,
house, policeman. Yes, of course. However, this taking is always a tak-
ing within the context of dealing-with something, and therefore is
always a taking-as, but in such a way that the as-character does not
become explicit in the act. The non-explicitness of this “as” is precisely
what constitutes the act’s so-called directness. Yes, the thing that is
understood can be apprehended directly as it is in itself. But this di-
rectness regarding the thing apprehended does not inhibit the act from
having a developed structure. Moreover, what is structural and neces-
sary in the act of [direct] understanding need not be found, or co-ap-
prehended, or expressly named in the thing understood. I repeat: The
[primary] as-structure does not belong to something thematically un-
derstood. It certainly can be understood, but not directly in the pro-
cess of focally understanding a table, a chair, or the like.

Acts of directly taking something, having something, dealing with it
“as something,” are so original that trying to understand anything
without employing the “as” requires (if it’s possible at all) a peculiar
inversion of the natural order. Understanding something without the
“as”—in a pure sensation, for example—can be carried out only “reduc-
tively,” by “pulling back” from an as-structured experience. And we
must say: far from being primordial, we have to designate it as an arti-
ficially worked-up act. Most important, such an experience is per se pos-

13. [Here (Moser, p. 304) Heidegger ends his lecture of Monday, 7 December
1925, to be followed by that of Tuesday, 8 December, which opened with a 1,030-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
§12. The basic structure of Adyoc 123
sible only as the privation of an as-structured experience. It occurs only
within an as-structured experience and by prescinding from the “as” —
which is the same as admitting that as-structured experience is pri-
mary, since it is what one must first of all prescind from. [146]

The as-structure belongs, roughly put, to our “comportment,” which
is not to say, however, that it is something subjective. Therefore, we must
keep in mind that, while we certainly do attribute this as-structure to
human comportment, we do not mean that such as-structured com-
portment—i.e., the act of making-sense-of—is somehow a subjective
way of forming and understanding what’s out there.

So making sense of something is an act that always has the as-
structure, but this as-structure is primarily enacted in dealing with
something. What we are mainly asking now is whether and to what
degree the act of sense-making is the basis of any statement qua state-
ment. Using Aristotle, we have already indicated that oUvOeotc and
dtaigeoig make up the basic structure of the statement. The question
now is (1) whether what oUv@eotc and dtaigeoic (linking-together
and separating) refer to is ultimately this phenomenon of the “as,” and
(2) to what degree this unified phenomenon of the “as” —which sense-
making and understanding always have—can, and first of all must, be
understood through ovv@eotc and dtaigeoic.

When we analyze this as-structured comportment of sense-making,
we see that, in it, something is always already understood. What is un-
derstood therein is the thing’s “what-as,” i.e., that in terms of which I
understand whatever object or thing I meet—say, this door here. This
what-as is already understood from the outset, and only in terms of it
does the thing that I encounter and deal with become understandable
as such. This what-as, in the light of which I understand and which I
already have from the outset (although unthematically) is, nonetheless,
not understood thematically in this “having-from-the-outset.” Rather, I
live in the understanding of writing, illuminating, entering-and-exiting,
and the like. More precisely, as existing—whether in speaking, enter-
ing/exiting, or understanding—I am an act of intelligently dealing-with.
My being in the world is nothing but this already-operating-with-
understanding in those various way of existing.

If we now look at matters more closely, we see that the so-called
direct having-something-present and understanding it—for example,
this chalk, this chalkboard, this door—is, when viewed structurally,
[147] not at all a “direct” understanding of something. Taken struc-
turally, I do not have direct access to the immediately understood
thing. Instead, I understand it in such a way that from the outset, as it
were, I already have had something to do with it, i.e., I already under-
stand it in terms of what it serves-for.

So in this apparently direct understanding of the things closest to me
124 Part I

in the lived world, when I apprehend and understand something, I have
always already gone further ahead“ than the thing that is given (in an
extreme sense) “directly” to me. I am always already further ahead by
understanding the end-for-which and the what-as in terms of which I
am taking the thing that is given and encountered at the moment. And
only from the what-as and end-for-which (in terms of which the thing
in question can serve) —only from this end-for-which, where in fact I
always already am—do I return to the thing that I encounter.

Thus the direct understanding of something that is given in the
lived world in the most natural way is constantly a returning to what I
encounter, a constant return that is necessary because my own au-
thentic being, as concernful-dealing-with-things-in-the-world, has
the property of always-already-being-ahead-with-something [Jmmer-
schon-vorweg-sein-bei-etwas]. Because my being is such that I am out
ahead of myself, I must, in order to understand something I encoun-
ter, come back from this being-out-ahead to the thing I encounter.

Here we can already see an immanent structure of direct understand-
ing qua as-structured comportment, and on closer analysis it turns out
to be time. And this being-ahead-of-myself as a returning is a peculiar
kind of movement that time itself constantly makes, if I may put it this
way.’? So when I simply understand the most natural things that I deal
with without thematically understanding them, I do not see, for exam-
ple, a white thing that, by a some kind of manipulations I then figure out
is chalk. Instead, from the outset I already live in connections that are
related to the end-for-which, I am held out into a specific lived world
that is oriented to specific kinds of behavior and concern, and from these
behaviors and concerns [148] I understand this thing as chalk.

Even if my sense organs and sense perception possessed the most
highly developed and refined sensibility, so that I had a greatly en-
hanced sense for receiving such things; and even if my understanding
had the richest store of concepts for such data, it would remain forever
incomprehensible how I might happen to see, simply and directly, a
piece of chalk. That is, it would be incomprehensible until I include this
basic behavior of existence (dealing-with as a form of concern-about) in
my interpretation, along with the as-structure we just discussed.

Therefore we see that the as-structure is bound up with a primary
human comportment, and we see that this sense-making behavior is
a way of being that we may briefly characterize as: “Always already

14. In principle, I meet usable things in terms of a world.

15. [GA 21 (p. 147.24-25) has “eine eigentiimliche Bewegung, wenn ich so
sagen darf, die das Dasein selbst standig macht,” whereas Moser (p. 315.15) reads
“die Zeit” instead of “Dasein”: “die die Zeit standig macht.” Weiss (p. 76.10) con-
firms Moser’s record here.]
§12. The basic structure of Advyoc 125
abiding with the source of meaning and understanding, while return-
ing to whatever we encounter.” This “abiding” is a matter of (1) stay-
ing with the what-as I take the encountered object, and (2) staying
with the returning from there, i.e., from the source that is the basis for
understanding the object. This returning is precisely what discloses
whatever we encounter, for example, as a door or as chalk. Therefore
this returning from the whence-and-whereby with which I already
am present is precisely what has the special function of disclosing.
This is the first level in our interpretation of such as-structured behav-
ior. Later, in clarifying the statement even further, we will need to
track its structure (as interpreted thus far) further back. Then you will
see that truly understanding a phenomenon as simple as the state-
ment, “This chalkboard is black,” requires that you have already un-
dertaken a good deal of preparation and study.

Now as regards the structure we have been characterizing, which
has the as-structure—the “already-ahead-of-oneself that returns to
something and by returning discloses it”—we could also determine
this making-sense-of-something (as I put it briefly) in this way: That
in terms of which one makes sense of something must be brought to-
gether and taken together with what is being made sense of. This is
the oUv@eotc part. At the same time this bringing together and taking
together [149] entails that both of them—the whence of the sense-
making and the thing to be made sense of—are separated and must be
kept separate in the act of sense-making. This bringing together and
taking together is possible only by keeping them separate. And vice
versa: keeping them separate is possible—as this specific act of keeping
separate—only in an encompassing act of keeping them together.

So we see that the act of sense-making, owing to its as-structure, can
in fact be understood with the help of these formal determinations of
ovvGeot<s and dtaigecic. But then at the same time you can see that this
as-structure can be characterized, with demonstrable legitimacy, as the
unity of ovv@eotc and dtatgeots only if beforehand the phenomenon of
sense-making has already been laid out and seen as such, since this
phenomenon of sense-making cannot be construed in a purely formal
way by means of the structures of a synthesizing separation and a sepa-
rating synthesizing. In other words, the formal structure of oVv@eotc
and dtaigeoic does not get to the authentic sense of the comportment
itself. Of itself, the mere structure of a separating synthesis does not
explain why a comportment that has this structure is a sense-making
and intelligent comportment of the kind we indicated earlier. LvvOeotc
and dtaigeoic are merely empty, formal determinations, and they are
not intrinsically and exclusively adapted to making-sense— even though
their own ultimate origin may have to be understood in terms of
sense-making.
126 Part I

This as-structure—or more precisely, the act of dealing-with as a di-
rect having and taking, insofar as it is determined by the as-structure—
determines our being unto the world and in large measure even our
being unto ourselves. For its part, sense-making is possible as a basic
form of our being only because our existence itself is capable of under-
standing. Even if one’s existence is thick and dull, that dullness is merely
one mode of the understanding that necessarily belongs to every exis-
tence that is being in the world. Obviously the mode of understanding
can vary widely. [150]

The act of making-sense or understanding is directed primarily not
to individual things and to general concepts. Instead, it is alive in one’s
firsthand lived world and in one’s world as a whole. In this act of
sense-making, the world is opened up for existence. This disclosure is
the uncovering of the current form of a being’s suitability-for, whereby
it is present as a being. Whatever gets opened up this way can be held
on to, even when the worldly thing in question is not itself present.
That is, the opening-up of the world—which unfolds in the act of
understanding or sense-making—can be possessed and preserved as
meaning, i.e., as a world of understanding in which existence
operates.'°

* * *

In the preceding lecture hour, we delineated the structure of the “as”
more precisely. It is important in analyses like this to remember the
context we are working in. Briefly: Our topic is truth, specifically the
truth of Adyoc and more precisely yet, the question “What makes
Aoyos as such able to be true or false?” Aristotle’s answer is: Adyoc
can be true or false because it has the structure of oUVvOeoic. So we
asked how much Adyoc has to do with ovvOeoc. Further study showed
that oVvOeotc is only one structural moment of Adyoc, and it is neces-
sarily accompanied by dtaigeotc. That led to a further question: Which
phenomenon possesses these two properties in a unified way?

That phenomenon is the “as,” the structure that belongs to under-
standing as such. Here understanding must be understood as a basic
form of being of our existence. This form of being is defined as one
which always already lives ahead in the source of sense-making (in

16. [Here the lecture of Tuesday, 8 December 1925, draws to a close, to be fol-
lowed by the twenty-first lecture on Thursday, 10 December (Moser, p. 319).
Whereas up to this point GA 21 has omitted all summaries of the previous lecture,
here (GA 21, pp. 150-151 n. 6) the text provides part of the summary that Hei-
degger read out at the beginning of his 12 December lecture, but confines it to a
long footnote. For the complete summary that Heidegger read in class and that I
draw on, cf. Moser, pp. 319-324. I put the summary in its proper place at the be-
ginning of the lecture.]
§12. The basic structure of Adyoc 127
the what-as) and which comes back to a present thing and, in thus
coming back, discloses this thing as being this or that.

This way of being—always already living ahead in the end-for-which
as returning-to and disclosing—is an original, unified, fundamental
comportment whose structure expresses the “as.” The “as” has the func-
tion of uncovering something in terms of something, of uncover some-
thing as—i.e., as this or that. The “as” is the structure of understanding.
The understood is a é9unveta, that-which-is-understood in an under-
standing. We said that understanding is a basic comportment of exis-
tence. Therefore, the structure of the “as” is the fundamental herme-
neutical structure of the being of that being which we call existence
(human life). This fundamental hermeneutical structure can be appre-
hended in a relatively (and I emphasize relatively) original form of what
we called “direct dealing-with-something.”

This basic, unified structure that is expressed in the “as” cannot be
further broken down into pieces but is simply to be interpreted more
originally as a whole in its wholeness. Later we shall see that where
this structure is not yet adequately clarified, it is understood extrinsi-
cally in an indirect and formal way—determinations that are, in any
case, possible.

In the primary understanding that goes with dealing-with-some-
thing, the thing that is understood or made sense of is disclosed. In this
way understanding is able to take for itself the disclosure—the “result,”
as it were, [of the sense-making] —and preserve it. The result of an act
of sense-making is precisely sense or meaning—not what we usually call
the “meaning of a word” but the primary meaning, to which words can
then accrue.!” [151]

Only insofar as this capacity to understand—to make sense of—al-
ready belongs to existence, can existence express itself in sounds, such
that these vocal sounds are words that now have meaning. Because
existence, in its very being, is sense-making, it lives in meanings and
can express itself in and as meanings. Only because there are such
vocal sounds (i.e., words) that accrue to meanings, can there be indi-
vidual words [Worter],’® i.e., the linguistic forms that are stamped by
meaning and can be detached from that meaning. We call such a
whole of sounds in which existence’s capacity to understand has
somehow evolved and become existential, Janguage; and when I speak
here of a whole of existence I do not mean an individual act of exis-
tence, but being-with-each-other qua historical.

The kind of being that pertains to the phenomenon we call language

17. [The abbreviated summary ends here. ]

18. [That is, dwvat (Latin, voces), sounds uttered by the human voice, as con-
trasted with odor, the inarticulate sounds of an animal.]
128 Part I

is even today still fundamentally obscure. Language—which every day
grows and every day dissolves, which changes from generation to gen-
eration or lies dead for centuries—is still entirely unexplained, as is the
peculiar being of language itself. In other words, basically the kind of
being that pertains to this phenomenon which is the topic of all philol-
ogy and linguistics is, in the final analysis, ontologically obscure. None-
theless we are able to say something about the being of language, in-
sofar as language is possible, only because of the human capacity to
understand—that is, existence itself, to which the structure of under-
standing belongs. And because existence, as understanding and sense-
making, is intrinsically historical, so too the particular kind of being
[152] of that manifold of words that we call our vocabulary as a whole,
or language, is also historical.

Of course, this determination is still quite empty, but even so, it
indicates that the phenomenon of language—taken now in the narrow
sense of its linguistic form, separated somehow from the content of the
meaning—this whole structural interrelation of linguistic forms can
itself be understood only in terms of the historicity of existence.

At this point we shall not go into the phenomenon of language as
such. We will mention the phenomenon only in terms of our focus on
meaning, in which language is grounded. In keeping with this found-
ing matrix of linguistic and verbal sounds bound up with understand-
ing and sense-making, we must also keep separate some questions
that one asks (usually in an erroneous way) about language. The ques-
tion about how language began is fundamentally different from the
question about the origin of meaning. The question about how a par-
ticular language (or language as such) began or developed—if it is a
possible line of questioning and investigating—presupposes that one
has already cleared up the question about the origin of meaning as
such. So we begin to see the depths we are being led into by the task
of understanding, in all its basic dimensions, something as simple as
the spoken sentence: “This chalkboard is black.”

We now limit our specific investigation to a broad analysis of the as-
structure and its function as the foundation of the statement. The ques-
tion about the basic structure of Adyoc has led us beyond the phenom-
enon of the “as” and further down the path to the phenomenon of
meaning, which is mentioned in the title of this section (§12). Our un-
derstanding of the as-structure itself stands or falls with the possibility
of a more penetrating interpretation of sense-making and understanding.
Our question now is not first of all about the origin of meaning. It is,
rather: “What function does meaning or the [153] as-structure have as
regards the possibility of those statements that have the distinguishing
characteristic of being able to be true or false?”
§12. The basic structure of Adyoc 129
b) The modification of the as-structure in the act of

determining: the apophantic “as”
The statement, as indicatively showing-something-as, is possible only
on the basis of our already-being-with the subject-matter-to-be-shown,
specifically in such a way that the subject matter is somehow disclosed.
To a linguistic orientation, a statement can be understood as an inter-
connection of meanings of words. To that degree, it entails that the plu-
rality of meanings in the unity of a sentence is possible only on the basis
of and in the medium of meaning. Whatever specific structure it may
also have as an act of predication, the act of indicatively showing-some-
thing-as operates in the act of having and understanding the subject
matter of the speech. This act of having and understanding (i.e., our
underlying familiarity with the subject matter) has the structure of “as.”
Thus all the ways of showing-as—i.e., the particular forms in which such
showing-as is carried out—cannot as such renounce the as-structure.
The “as” is the basic structure whereby we understand and have access
to anything. The possible subject matter of any applicable determination
is understood first of all and a priori; and in accessing and appropriating
that subject matter, the “as” necessarily preserves it.

These ways of asserting, i.e., determining something about something,
get modified in accordance with the possible ways of showing-as and
with the thing that is to be shown-as. Regardless of how they are modi-
fied, these ways of asserting something about something are essentially
assigned to the as-structure and at the same time help to modify it.

In carrying out a statement in the form of predication, specifically
in the sense of a categorial statement, the “as” of the primary under-
standing is simultaneously flattened out into the pure and simple de-
termination of a thing. The showing takes on the sense of letting us
see the presence of something with and near something else. [154] We
see something—and as co-present with it, we see something else. We
must now show this flattening-out in the phenomenon in order to
show the context of the “as” that does the primary uncovering, along
with the leveled-down “as” that enacts a determination.

In a direct act of understanding and dealing with something, the
thing is understood in terms of what it is for. In such cases the end-for-
which (or, seen in terms of [predicative] understanding, the what-it-
is) is not thematically considered, much less thematically understood.
Rather, we already live in it in some form of concern-about. Questions
about which kinds of “end-for-which” actually and genetically come
first (even a vegetable lives its not-too-bright life in terms of an end-
for-which) are entirely of secondary importance in comparison with
the question of the essential structure of the end-for-which.
130 Part I

Concern-about can diversify itself as this or that kind of concern-
about enacted in this or that particular way only if that which underlies
such a factual “development” is itself, by its nature, already concern-
about. Managing and dealing with things does not first occur when I
begin to handle something. Rather, I can start to handle something
only because my existence is already determined in the first place as
concern-about and dealing-with. Existence as such “is” concern-about;
and all I can do is develop certain degrees of it and directions that give
expression to concern-about and fulfill it.

So, insofar as we are at all, we live existentially in concern-about,
which is to say, in the understanding of an end-for-which. But in such
dealings we never thematically understand or even thematically think
about this end-for-which that makes understanding possible in the
form of the “what-as.” Rather, in our direct dealings it is the means-
whereby that is thematic. The means-whereby or means, is what gets
understood as this-or-that thematically in the “as.” But while it is the-
matic, it is not thematic for theoretical understanding.

Now what about the statement? In the statement, the means-whereby
of our dealings becomes the thing-about-which of an act of showing-as.
Taken ontologically, such showing-as is also a dealing-with. We will
have to interpret this more precisely, but in any case showing-as is a
dealing-with, in which the means-whereby (which is already uncov-
ered and understood in understanding) has to come to light. [155] And
along with that, what is already uncovered must be further uncovered.
So a dealing-with whose concern-about brings about an uncovering is
itself an act of uncovering. The statement is an act of understanding in
dealing-with, whose concern [Sorge] is the act of uncovering, which
therefore necessarily has the as-structure in an emphatic sense.

If, in an act of dealing directly with something, we encounter the
means-whereby in such a way that we make a statement about it, the
means-whereby becomes that-about-which. The thematizing of the about-
which at first does not change anything in the means-whereby—i.e., it
does not change its intelligibility. We encounter the means-whereby as
something that from the start was already understood in the structure
of the primary “as.”

But what happens when we thematize in the form of making a
statement and thematically speaking about the means-whereby? The
thematizing performed by the statement works within the statement’s
function, which is to show-something-as. In other words, the state-
ment is purely concerned with anodaiveoOat, uncovering-something-
as. In a statement, the uncovering understands the means-whereby in
terms of what-it-is, but it does not draw that “what-it-is” from any-
thing else—from some practical function, for example—but only from
the thing it is speaking about.
§12. The basic structure of Adyoc 13]

This is the first peculiarity: the what-it-is is now not taken from the
thing’s end-for-which but from the very thing about which the state-
ment is made. The proper sense of a statement, is to express something
as something, to take the that-in-terms-of-which a thing is to be de-
termined expressly from the thing spoken about.

So we find that the statement has a double aspect: In the first case,
what-the-thing-is corresponds to the task to be performed and thus to
the kind of concern that is expressed in the statement about the thing.
Second, the what-it-is is mot taken from any practical function or from
any orientation to another thing. Instead, it is taken from the very
thing that is spoken about.

Here we find the third characteristic of the statement: [156] the
particular kind of showing and uncovering that pertains to the state-
ment is to a certain degree concentrated on what the speaking is about.
In dealing with and understanding the chalk, we do not think about
the chalk thematically. We don’t even enact our understanding of the
chalk thematically and explicitly in terms of its function.

The statement, however, concentrates on the chalk itself as something
present. In the statement, “This chalk is white,” the declaration consists
in bringing into view something that is already there in the subject mat-
ter that the speech is about, and this subject-matter-about-which is like-
wise already there. This form of indicating and uncovering something
that is just there (e.g., the chalk), bringing it closer and into focus in
terms of what it is as just being there (its whiteness), is what we call de-
termining. Determining is thus a mode of indicating and uncovering, and
as such it has a specific structure to its “as.” The difference between the
as-structure of a determining statement and the as-structure of a direct
understanding is manifest in the three factors we mentioned above.'”

Now our question is: “To what degree must we see the determination
of things by statements as a leveling-down of the primary form of under-
standing, namely, dealing-with?” We saw that in determining by way of
statements, the as-what-it-is (the whiteness) whence comes the determi-
nation is drawn from the given subject-matter-about-which itself. So the
statement, a concernful comportment of existence, is broadly speaking
also an act of dealing-with—but not in the way a worker deals with
things, but simply as an act of speaking about something. To a certain

19. There are various levels between a functional involvement with some-
thing, on the one hand, and a pure determining on the other. However, our anal-
ysis deals chiefly with the two “extremes.”

1. A statement in and for a practical function;

2. a determining that describes one’s specific lived world;

3. a determining as a statement about what is just there, what merely
occurs.
132 Part I
degree such an act of dealing-with something by speaking about it some-
how solidifies itself in such a way that the chalk is now simply there.

With the statement, the act of dealing-with something has now
been [157] withdrawn from the primary function of, for example, writ-
ing. This means that, after this withdrawal from an immediate task,
the understanding no longer really lives in a practical function, no
longer lives into the task for which the given implement can be used.
Concern-about and dealing-with are now restricted to the status of
“there”: the chalk is just there. And regarding the focus of its way of
showing things, the statement is now tied, so to speak, to what-is-
there as just-being-there. Its sole orientation is to bring closer what-is-
there as being-there, for the purpose of understanding it.

This entails that, in and through this process of thematization, the
subject-matter-about-which (which we have already determined as the
thematic means-whereby) gets covered-over to a certain extent as regards
that-as-which it was properly understood. So now when I say “This
chalk is white,” this statement about something that I might deal with
is no longer a statement that, as such and in its very form, is primarily
related to dealing-with. If I were to say as I am writing, “This chalk is
too hard”—or “too scratchy,” or whatever—I would be making a state-
ment within a practical function, namely that of writing. I would be
making a statement that I simply could not interpret as:

This statement, “This chalk is too scratchy,” is an act of defining
the chalk as well as spelling out my relation to the chalk—and
inability to relate to it—i.e., my inability to write “properly”
with it.
No, when I make the statement, “This chalk is too scratchy,” I do not
mean to determine the thing I have in my hand as something pos-
sessed of the property of grittiness or scratchiness. Rather, what I
mean to say with my statement is that it is an obstacle to my writing.
The statement is interpretatively related to my writing activity, my
primary concern to write. That is, the statement is a spelling-out of my
being-in [the world] as a being-with [the chalk]. In a practical func-
tion, the means-whereby is necessarily co-understood: I live by being
immersed in it. We must keep this in mind in order to understand the
kinds of contradictions that run through traditional logic when the
usual example of a determination comes up: “The roses are in bloom.”
One then says that these things, the roses, have the property [158] or
condition of blooming.

That is not what anyone means when he or she says, “The roses are in
bloom.” The example is a pure construction taken from a statement that
is simply oriented to giving a flat determination of something just-there.
When a thing gets thematized in such a way that the means-whereby of
§12. The basic structure of Advyoc 133
firsthand dealings-with-things gets transformed into the about-which of
a statement that determines the thing, at that point the genuine ontologi-
cal property of the thing (the chalk, for example) withdraws. The chalk
gets flattened out into a mere thing, “This white thing here”—whether
this piece of paper or that lamp—is no different from any other thing,
since I understand them all as just things on hand.

The chalk’s particular, original way of being—as an implement—is
now leveled down to this average state of mere thereness, where it is
no different from any other thing. This way of showing something—
this determination performed in the declarative-determining form of
“The chalk is white”—is possible only on the basis of a re-concealing of
the chalk as a means whereby we deal with things. Admittedly, it is
not necessarily a concealing: in this statement too, we can still hold on
to the original implement. However, we come to understand this kind
of statement when we in some way clarify the two /imit-cases: that of a
direct, unexpressed, unthematic dealing with something, and that of
the thematizing determination of a something that is just there. This
latter way of uncovering and showing-something-as by means of a
statement is itself a modification of the structure of the “as.””°

* * *

We have defined determining as the act of indicating and bringing into
view something just-there in its state of being just-there in this way or
that. Such determining, as a declaration, is a way of uncovering, and
therefore it necessarily has the structure of the “as.” Insofar as it is a
way of uncovering, the original hermeneutical as-structure has been
modified. This modifying, which I explained by contrasting three dif-
ferent forms [of the statement], now signifies in se to a flattening out
[159] of the original structure. In fact, insofar as the statement is now
directed thematically toward something (the chalk) with which I have
original functional dealings, the thing about which I make the state-
ment becomes merely something-there. It is now simply something to
be understood, a statement’s subject matter in its mere thereness.

When something that was originally used as an implement gets the-
matized into something just-there, the original ontological character of
the object (the chalk) is at the same time covered-over insofar as the
chalk is now no longer immediately there as an implement, but rather
as a mere present-thing in which I find a property that I attribute to the
thing and, by so doing, determine the thing. The statement as indicat-
ing and determining hovers over, as it were, the objects that are given

20. [Here (Moser, p. 319) Heidegger ends his lecture of Thursday, 10 December
1925, to be followed by that of Friday, 11 December, which opened with a 340-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
134 Part I

firsthand in one’s lived world and that are primarily oriented to use.
Because of that the things of the lived world—things of use or in general
anything oriented to concern-about as a non-theoretical comportment—
are leveled down to things that are merely present, so that they are no
longer differentiated as being implements adapted to certain functions.

However, the statement’s modification of the as-structure always
presupposes the original as-structure, the underlying understanding
of the thing that gets flattened out in and through the statement. Thus,
determination-via-statement is never a primary act of uncovering. It
never determines a primary and original comportment toward beings,
and as a result this form of Adyoc can never become our guide to the
question of what beings are.

In the logic and doctrine of being of the Greeks, and in the tradition
up to Husserl,?? Adyog as determination-via-statements has in fact
been the guide for pursuing the inquiry into being. [160] That is to
say, beings are there as objects of a possible determination or deter-
minability. But once we recognize that this very determining, along
with its entire structure, is a derived phenomenon, we also see that
the phenomenon of determination cannot be the starting point for the
question of being—if, that is, this question is supposed to understand
the phenomenon of being in its roots.

We have shown the extent to which the as-structure of primary un-
derstanding—i.e., the “as” of the basic hermeneutical structure of exis-
tence—can be characterized formally and extrinsically as oUvOeotc and
dtaigeoic. We also emphasized that when Aristotle speaks of oUvOEotc
and dtaigeoic, he does not and cannot mean the structure of this pri-
mary “as.” Rather he is referring to another structure, that of the de-
rived, flattened-out and flattening “as.” Now, on the basis of our inter-
pretation of the “as” used in determining thereness, we need to explain
why the formal structure of synthesis is used to characterize this “as.”

In the first place, why did the as-structure necessarily come to the
fore at this point? We answer: Here the “as” structures a concernful
comportment that highlights an as-what and thereby highlights the
determination of something as something in terms of that as-what.
The statement, when performed explicitly, thematically highlights an
as-what, and it does so explicitly in terms of the subject matter itself
that is to be determined in light of this as-what. What is more, in this
case the “as” is flattened out into a determination. Formally speaking,
determination is a relation and specifically a synthetic relation. In any

21. On being and truth in correlation with the ideas of statement, judgment,
“doxa” qua determination, see Husserl, Ideen I, §§103ff., especially §142, “Ratio-
nal Positing and Being,” which concerns the essential correlation between the
idea of true being and truth, reason, consciousness.
§12. The basic structure of Advyoc 135
case, in this relation the synthetic factor [that flattens out the “as”]
presses to the fore ahead of the “analytic” moment. This synthetic rela-
tion can be isolated over against the primary function of Adyoc, which
is to show-something-as. Then, when Adyoc gets cut loose, so to speak,
from the specific relation of the subject matter (the about-which) and
the predicate (the as-what), it gets passed off as the relation of any-
thing to anything, equivalent to formal synthesizing as such.

In a certain sense, Aristotle uses the term Adyoc formally. But at
the same time he endows it with the sense of the “apophantic,” i.e.,
[161] the showing-of-beings-as. Aristotle also sees in aTIOpavotc the
primary and essential relatedness of the Adyoc (taken as Adyoc tLvOc,
speech about something) to beings, and this Adyoc has to indicatively
show-something-as only via determining them [in statements]. As re-
gards structure, this view of Adyoc is obviously quite close to that of
an empty “relating and synthesizing.” What is more, the determining
statement, taken as something uttered (a series of words related to
each other and to a context), itself becomes just “something there.”

These observations make one thing very clear: we have not under-
stood the phenomena of making a statement— qua showing-as, deter-
mining-as, etc.—as long as we simply characterize them as synthesis,
and let it go at that. To do only that is to grope around and latch on to
the first thing we come up with, no matter how irrelevant. But there
is something even more fatal. If we think that synthesis, taken for-
mally, is the structural meaning of Adyoc in general, we preclude any
possibility of understanding sense-making, understanding, explica-
tion, and, more generally, even language. Of course, for the sake of
shorthand characterizations, we can make use of these formal deter-
minations, but only after we have first understood the complete struc-
ture of the phenomenon. Making an indicative statement has the
sense of determining something in its mere thereness, and it charac-
terizes the “as” in this way. To understand synthesis, when it is not
taken formally, we have to begin with this.** [162]

22. Nonetheless, taking the as-structure in its formal character has yet another
consequence, not just for the interpretation of Adyoc and for the concept of the
“logical” (i-e., determining and determinedness), but also for the interpretation of
being. The ontic is conceptualized in terms of logical structures (“logical” under-
stood in the sense we have indicated). How does that come about? When we indi-
cate something as something by way of what we have characterized as a state-
ment, the thing comes to be seen. The subject matter (= what is simply there) gets
shown as something, while the “as-what” gets shown as the “as-what” of what is
simply there. This being has been synthesized as the synthetic being it is. The
thing itself, as something that [de facto] is there-together, now gets [explicitly]
brought together. It gets understood as simply out-there-together. It is apprehended
136 Part I
§13. The conditions of the possibility of Adyoc being false.
The question of truth

With this examination of Adyoc as an apophantic determination of
what’s there in its thereness we are sufficiently prepared to answer the
question, What makes the Adyoc that has this structure able to be false? From
the start, we have intentionally formulated the question in this pointed
way. In its complete form the question is: “What makes Adyoc able to be
true or false?” As we shall show, the way in which the Aoyoc can be true
is co-determined by the kind of falsehood that pertains to Adyoc. The
false, says Aristotle, is always and only where there is oUv@eo1c. Now, on
the basis of oUvOeot< as originally understood, how are we to clarify the
degree to which Adyoc, which is structured by such oUvOeotc, can be
true or false? We know what the structure of Adyoc is, but we certainly
do not yet know what “true” and “false” mean, nor, therefore, what
kind of determinations can pertain to Adyoc.

If you recall the chart that we began with earlier, you will remem-
ber that, in characterizing the chart, we said that our expressions
“true” and “false,” “truth” and “falsehood,” are not adequate to what
the Greeks meant by the corresponding expressions a&AnOéc and
Wevdoc. By these terms, the Greeks understood that truth = the act of
uncovering or uncoveredness, and Wevdoc or falsehood = covering-
over or dissembling. Further, in discussing truth and falsehood we
have already said that it would be a prejudice to think that Aristotle
championed a theory of truth as a copy-theory [Abbildtheorie], as if
truth consisted in the fact that representations within the soul repro-
duce things outside. Aristotle’s concept of truth and the Greek concept
of truth generally are neither oriented to images nor to be understood
in terms of this kind of correspondence. [163] Rather, our understand-
ing of them should be oriented to uncovering and covering-over.

a) Preparatory interpretation. Metaphysics IV 7 and V1 4,
and De interpretatione 1

Now we first attempt to provide a very general characterization of truth
and falsehood as Aristotle understands them. That will serve as the nec-
essary basis for asking how ovv@eotc makes truth and falsehood possi-
ble. I will discuss somewhat briefly only two citations that can provide
you with a rough idea of what kind of interpretation of truth one finds
in Aristotle:

(logically) in terms of the statement defined as synthesis. This becomes clear from
Aristotle’s definitions of true and false.
§13. The possibility of Adyoc being false 137

TO LEV yaQ A€yEtv TO OV EN) EivatT TO EN OV Eivat EvdO<C, TO 5€ TO Ov Eivat

Kal TO UN) Ov UN] eivat AANVEc. (Metaphysics IV 7, 1011b26)

To say-and-show that what-is is not, or that what-is-not is, is to cover-over.

But to show that what-is is, and what-is-not is not, is to uncover.

And if we read this determination of truth in our role as twentieth-
century Europeans, we think it is really quite trivial. But we need to
consider that this determination is the result of the greatest philo-
sophical effort that Plato and Aristotle ever made. You can hardly con-
ceive of what it means to press forward into such a “triviality.” So:
truth and falsehood are taken in connection with Aéyetv, speaking.

The essential element in this text is that speaking is understood
here not as judgment but, as the translation indicates, as the showing
of a being, amtodatveoVat. Once this basic structure of Aéyetv is under-
stood, this determination of being-true and being-false can offer no
support to the notion that truth is a matter of verifying the correspon-
dence between beings and the images or copies of them formed in
consciousness.

By its very meaning, to indicate a being is to be already present
with that being, even [164] when the subject matter that the speech
indicates is not bodily present but only intended. Even when absent,
the very sense of the statement entails that the being itself is intended,
not some representation or image that “corresponds” to the absent
being.

Truth is not a relation that is “just there” between two beings that
themselves are “just there”—one mental, the other physical. Nor is it a
coordination, as philosophers like to say these days. If it is a relation at
all, it is one that has no analogies with any other relation between be-
ings. If I may put it this way, it is the relation of existence as such to its
very world. It is the world-openness of existence that is itself uncov-
ered—existence whose very being unto the world gets disclosed/un-
covered in and with its being unto the world.

Aristotle certainly did not really see this phenomenon, in any case
not in the ontological structure that is proper to it. But even less did he
invent anything like a copy-theory of truth. Rather, he stuck to the
phenomena and understood them as broadly as possible. That is, he
avoided a fundamental error in seeing, and thus kept the road open—
only, of course, to have it thoroughly blocked again.

The second text from which we can understand truth and false-
hood in Aristotle’s sense comes from Metaphysics VI 4. emphasize that
these explications de texte do not yet constitute an authentic interpreta-
tion but are only preparatory. Only later will we come to understand
the phenomena on the basis of ovvOeotc.
138 Part I

TO Lev yao aANVEs THV KaTahactw emt TH OVYyKEILéevW EXEL TV

andhmacw él TW SIENMEVW, TO dE WEvSOS TOVTOV TOV HEQLOOD TI]V

avtidaov. (Metaphysics V1 4, 1027b20-22)
In a translation, with explanations in brackets:

Uncovering {as a form of enactment} entails attribution {of something to

something} regarding things already-present-together, and denial {of

something to something} with regard to what is taken apart; {or more pre-

cisely, with regard to what is already present but not together-with}. [165]

But covering-over consists in saying the opposite {about what is already

together-with or already separated from something else}.

So, covering-over consists in attributing something to something when
they actually are apart in the given thing, and in denying something of
something when in fact they are together in the thing.

This second text gives us something new in relation to the first text,
but the new element is already familiar to us. When, in what we have
characterized as a statement, we indicate and determine something as
something, the being does indeed come to light. What is present is
indicated as something, in such a way that the what as-which the
being is shown “lies” there in that being (cf. keituevov—kettat [“lying
there—to lie there”]). That is, the thing, the statement’s subject matter,
is brought together as something that lies together. The being is under-
stood as something lying-there-together. But that means that the
being is characterized on the basis of the ovv- of ovvOeotc. With ex-
planations in brackets:

TOUTO OE {TO AANVES KALTO ELVdOC} ETLTWV TEAYUATWV ~EOTLTC OVYKELDOAL

1} SiEnoVat Wote AANVEVEL LEV 6 TO SUENLEVOV OidLLEVOS SINENOOaL Kat

TO OVYKELMEVOV OVYKELODAL EWEVOTAL SE O EVAVTLWS EXWV T] TA TIOAYHATA.

(Metaphysics 1X 10, 1051b2-5)

In a translation, with explanations in brackets:

With regard to existent things, this {uncovering and covering-over} is

about their {already} lying-together or taken-apart-ness. Therefore, who-

ever takes the taken-apart in its taken-apart-ness, and the lying-together
in its lying-together-ness, uncovers. But when someone {in taking beings,

i.e., discussing and thus showing them} relates to them in the opposite

way, that person covers-over.

Insofar as synthesis is the structure of Adyoc as indicative comport-
ment, the dv and its structure is interpreted on the basis of the Adyoc
and its structure. The structure of being has the character of being
§13. The possibility of Adyoc being false 139
“logical” in the strict sense of the word: not an ontology of beings, but
a logic of beings.

Catchword determinations like this are always dangerous, and for
the most part are usually false. What we have said should simply make
us notice the fact that oUvOeotc [166] emerges when we characterize
truth with regard to the thing itself that is to be shown-as.

LvvOeotc is the structure not only of the Adyoc but of the subject
matter gua that-about-which, insofar as the subject matter after all is
and must be a being in the sense of something true. Thus, from the
first characteristic of truth and falsehood we see that there is no basis
or possibility for interpreting this definition in the sense of a copying.
From the second characteristic we see that the thing itself, which is
correlative to the indicative statement, is understood by way of syn-
thesis. To be sure, we may expect an objection that might be drawn
from De interpretatione (chap. 1), the treatise in which Adyoc itself is
Aristotle’s theme. The second sentence of chapter 1 starts right off
with a brief explanation that might actually tempt us to prove that
Aristotle’s concept of truth does indeed intend something like the
copying-of-things through mental processes. In fact, this passage is
also the classical one that philosophers appeal to (usually in a variety
of roundabout ways and always in ignorance of the context) in an ef-
fort to point out and prove that Aristotle introduced into philosophy
this naive concept of truth, as it is usually dubbed. I will discuss this
passage very briefly. It is also important for our later discussions about
the copula and negation.

éOTL HEV OVV TA EV TH PWV

TOV EV TH WUXT] TAOHUATWV OVEBOAA,
Kal TA YOaHOvEVA TWV Ev TH Pwvn.
KAL WOTEQ OVOE YOAUMATA TACL TA AUTA,

ovdé Owvai ai avtat

MV LEVTOL TAVTA ONMELA TOWTWY,

TAVTA TLAGL TAOHUATA THS WUXNS,

KAL WV TAVTA OMOLWLATA TEAYHATA Hd TAavTA. (De interpretatione 1,

16a3-8)

In a translation, with explanations in brackets:

There are linguistic utterances {words} in which something that is found in

our mental comportment {perception, reflection} is made known.

And what is written makes known the words. {So Aristotle begins with the

spoken word wherein—to put it briefly—the meaning is made known.
And the spoken word can express itself in the written word.}
And just as written signs are not the same for all peoples {the Egyptians
140 Part I
[167] have different ones from the Greeks}, so too the sounds {the forms
of the utterances} are not the same.

However, the things of which these uttered words are first {and properly}
signs {i.e., what the words give utterance to, what they are words for}—
these {the things intended, the apprehended as such} are identically the
same for everyone.

And the things {the medyuata that we deal with} of which they {the in-
tended and perceived, the meanings} are similitudes, they too are the
same, already {from the outset} and of themselves.”

k ok

From that last sentence people derive the “copy-theory.” Yes, Ouoimpua
can in fact mean an image or a copy. But on an equally original foot-
ing it means “that which has been assimilated to, become similar to,”
that which is “just the same as.”** If we translate TaONUaTa as “repre-
sentations” and understand that as “mental states,” then it is easy to
come up with a copy-theory interpretation. That is: In the mind there
are “states of mind,” mental states as images of things that are not in
the mind itself.

But the word in the text is not 7&0n (which can indeed mean such
states) but maOnuata—something that we meet, something that, when
met, is taken up—an affectio in the broadest sense. And Opommpata
means the assimilated, that which duoiwe éxet, that which, as encoun-
tering, is just the same as the thing itself. Our apprehending comports
itself in the same way as what is to be apprehended. The mtaOnuata is
the apprehended of an apprehending. The apprehending gives the thing
itself, lets us meet the thing just the way it is.

What is at stake here is not just any kind of assimilation. It is not,
for example, the assimilation of a mental state to a physical thing
(which is nonsensical). The assimilation we are taking about here
concurs very easily with the determination of truth in the text from
Metaphysics 1X 10 that we cited earlier.” [168]

The text from Metaphysics V1 4 is particularly clear about the meaning
that oUVv@eotc has when it comes to clarifying not only the true and the
false of Adyoc but also truth as the uncovering of things, i.e., as the

23. [Here (Moser, p. 351) Heidegger ends his lecture of Friday, 11 December
1925, to be followed by that of Monday, 14 December , which opened with a 430-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]

24. Therefore Aristotle can also say in De interpretatione 9, 19a33: OWotws OL
Aoyot AANVEeic WoTtEE TA TEAyUATA. “Adyot {i.e., the indicative showing of be-
ings} uncover just as much as the being itself does {insofar as it is uncovered}.”

25. We are talking about Ouoiwots in terms of anodatveo@at. The act of show-
ing something assimilates itself to that thing in the only way that makes any sense
in such a comportment, viz., in the vornua.
§13. The possibility of Adyoc being false 141
structure of those things themselves. That is why we said earlier that
Aristotle uses oVv@eotc not in a purely formal sense but in an apophan-
tic sense, as related to and with regard to the things themselves.

LvvGeotc, as the condition of possibility of being false and espe-
cially of being true, is a chameleon-like concept, sometimes logical,
sometimes ontological—or more precisely, usually both at the same
time. More precisely yet: neither the one nor the other. That is the
characteristic stage of both Aristotle’s and Plato’s philosophy. We only
imagine we understand the problems when we jump into this murky
business armed with our seemingly beautiful distinctions and con-
cepts of a modern system instead of guarding this authentically pro-
ductive lack of clarity. The supposed clarity of the moderns consists
merely in the fact that they have killed off the problems beforehand.
It is now a matter of clearing out this thicket of relations within the
concept of oVvOectc so that we can understand how ovvO@eotc is the
condition of the possibility of falsehood and truth.

For Plato, the false—and in connection with it, deception, deceit,
and error—were special phenomena that first of all had to be, so to
speak, battled with in a particular demonstration that there are in fact
such things and that they thus have a certain kind of being. Under the
weighty pressure of Parmenides’ proposition, “Beings are, non-beings
are not,” it seemed absolutely to be the case that deception, falsehood,
and error—as negative, as nothing—were not and could not be.

It remains one of Plato’s undying achievements to have shown that
even error and falsehood exist. This was possible for him only because
he posed anew the problem of being. Of course, he also did not answer
the question of how the being of the false is possible and what it means,
[169] any more than Aristotle did, even though by building on Plato’s
work, Aristotle pressed further ahead. Aristotle showed how a condi-
tion of the possibility of falsehood lies within beings themselves and
the possible ways they can be. This is a discovery that later fell into
absolute oblivion (where it remains today), because the problem of
truth was no longer understood. We think that error and deception
are something subjective and have their origin in one’s thinking when
it violates its own laws and the like.

If we understand the phenomenon of truth (as uncovering) more
radically—from existence itself and what we characterized as its basic
hermeneutical structure—then we can understand from the begin-
ning that falsehood necessarily depends on the very beings about
which statements are possible.

We have to clarify this briefly and in outline form. Truth is the un-
covering of beings. If Aoyoc is presumably able to be this possibility in
a specific form of performance, then, as Adyoc, it must already have a
relation to beings. It is one of existence’s ways of being unto the world
142 Part I

and unto itself (as existence) —in short, being unto beings. If false-

hood is supposed to pertain to Adyoc, then it must have something to

do with the structure of Adyoc. Therefore, falsehood is determined:

1. from the being itself and its being, in connection with which Aoyoc
is what it is;

2. from existential comportment itself.

According to Aristotle, the condition of the possibility of falsehood
is synthesis and therefore synthesis in this double aspect: in beings
(whatever is there) as subject-matter-about-which; and in the very
comportment of making a statement.

With regard to its structure as the uncovering of beings, truth can
be divided in a corresponding way.

1. On the one hand, as uncoveredness it is a characteristic of beings
themselves (and in a special way a characteristic of the world);

2. on the other hand, as uncovering, it is a characteristic of the com-
portment of existence.

But this comportment itself, and existence as such, is uncovered in

and for itself. The phenomenon of [170] uncovering has several essen-

tial “sides.” But understanding must aim at seeing the original whole

out of which and for which these “sides” (to use this superficial name)

are what they are.”°

According to the structure of truth itself, synthesis is oriented both
to human comportment and to the subject matter that a statement
might uncover.*’ The problems now are: How do falsehood and truth
in Aristotle become intelligible on the basis of synthesis? And what
can we understand in the Greek concept of truth that is more funda-
mental than the traditional concept? And granted this broadening [of
the concept of truth], how far will we get in understanding not just
the fact that but also the reason why truth must be understood as the
truth of intuition?

It is possible there are many ways to gain an understanding of the
concept of truth and falsehood in Aristotle and in the Greeks gener-
ally. We wish to choose one way that will spare us a long drawn-out
interpretation and instead will take us directly to the basic question

26. For “sides” in the phenomenon of uncovering, see Ov we AANVEc Ev dtavoia
[“beings as uncovered in the discursive mind” (Metaphysics XI 8, 1065a22)].

27. [This appears to be the sense of the passage. Moser (p. 359.4-6) records
Heidegger as saying, “Synthesis is thus oriented to the comportment of existence
and at the same time to the subject matter of the statement”—that is, (1) to
anodavoic, and (2) to TO ov.]
§13. The possibility of Adyoc being false 143
about the structure of truth-and-falsehood, and about truth in gen-
eral. This will clarify how synthesis constitutes the framework and
the clue for understanding truth and falsehood conceptually. Simulta-
neously our discussion should find an explanation that had decisive
significance (although in a rather implicit way) for the history of the
problem of truth and of logic.

b) Truth and being. Interpretation of Metaphysics 1X 10
To reach these goals we have chosen Metaphysics [X 10 as the basis of
our interpretation of the problem of truth. This text is the basis from
which we must develop the problem of truth historically, both back-
ward [171] to Parmenides and forward to the Stoics, Boethius, the
Middle Ages, Descartes, and modern philosophy right up to Hegel.

We limit ourselves to these guiding questions. The first is: To what
degree is synthesis the condition of the possibility of falsehood and
truth? In pursuing an explanation we will keep in mind our promise to
explain how the question of truth in the Greeks is primarily oriented to
knowledge as intuition, a fact that determines all succeeding epochs.
Moreover, we will demonstrate more concretely than heretofore that
the problem of truth is inextricably linked with the question about being.

Metaphysics 1X 10 is the concluding chapter of a book (or treatise) that
is one of the most difficult of the treatises gathered under this title of
Metaphysics. This treatise © (or book IX) itself belongs together with the
two that precede it, Z and H (books VII and VIII), in such a way that in
IX 10, which deals with truth as such and with truth and falsehood, we
reach as it were the highest pinnacle of the fundamental investigation
of ontology. But this seems contradictory and impossible to traditional
philosophy, where truth is a characteristic of judgment and thinking—év
dtavoia, as even Aristotle himself says. Exactly for that reason truth is
not, in the tradition, a determination of the being of beings—and least
of all the “most proper” determination. This explains all the embarrass-
ment, uncertainty, and wavering on the question of whether this chap-
ter even belongs to book IX of the Metaphysics.

In his first book, Studien zur Entstehungsgeschichte der Metaphysik des
Aristoteles,?® Werner Jaeger drew the final consequences of the earlier
work of Hermann Bonitz and others regarding the literary character
of the treatise. He forcefully demonstrated that book IX is a collection
of individual treatises, parts of lectures, and introductions all of which
deal with ontology but which do not belong together in any obvious
fashion as regards their content and method. Jaeger emphasized the
coherence of Z, H, and © [books VII, VIII, and IX]. [172] He likewise

28. [Werner Jaeger, Studien zur Entstehungsgeschichte der Metaphysik des Aristoteles
(Berlin: Weidmann, 1912).]
144 Part I
took Z, H, and © to be the most positive as regards ontology; but pre-
cisely for that reason, he found it doubtful that IX 10 belonged to book
IX. Jaeger writes: “We can be brief in discussing this chapter because
Schwegler and Christ have already noted that it does not fit into the
context and the progression of the thinking” (ibid., p. 49). And in ital-
ics: “We are not talking about a gradual increase in ontological content regard-
ing the objects that are successively treated” (p. 52). The series substance-
possibility-actuality-truth does not in itself constitute an increasing
development of being. That is to say, being as uncoveredness is not a
more radical understanding of the concept of being [than the others],
such that the explanation of uncoveredness would possibly elevate the
ontological discussion to its apex.—“So the fact remains that this chap-
ter is there without any connection” and as “an appendage” (p. 52).
But on the contrary, Hermann Bonitz (whom Jaeger refutes, but in-
adequately, on p. 52) maintains in his Commentarius (1849)? that on the
basis of its content, this chapter belongs to the book as a whole. Bonitz
says:
Propterea non assentior Schweglero, qui hoc caput exterminari iubet e
Metaphysica. (Commentarius, p. 409)
Therefore I do not agree with Schwegler, who decrees that this chapter is
to be excised from the Metaphysics.
The reasons Bonitz gives for why the chapter belongs here are admit-
tedly just as inadequate as Jaeger’s contrary reasons, because, as re-
gards the issue, neither of them understands the problematic that runs
through the chapter and indeed through all of book IX. But here as
generally throughout his Commentarius, Bonitz shows that he has
much better instincts than Jaeger. Moreover, in his idea that IX 10
belongs to book IX, Bonitz completely agrees with Thomas Aquinas;
see In XII libros Metaphysicorum, ed. Parma, vol. 20, p. 549. Suarez in-
cluded Thomas’s notion in his Disputationes Metaphysicae.*° These liter-
ary filiations might seem to be of little import, [173] but we note their
fundamental impact when we observe that the metaphysics of Des-
cartes, Spinoza, Leibniz, Wolff, Kant, and Hegel grow out of Suarez’s
Disputationes Metaphysicae. Through these reflections, the ontological
29. [Hermann Bonitz, Aristotelis Metaphysica. Commentarius (repr. Hildesheim: G.
Olms, 1960; originally published in 1849, as vol. 2 of his Aristotelis Metaphysica).]
30. [Opera omnia (Paris, 1866), vol. 25, introduction, p. liii.] This Disputationes
Metaphysicae in two volumes is not a running commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphys-
ics but an ontology in its own right, although of course closely connected with the
outline of the inquiry in Thomas. [Heidegger provides the above reference in his
lecture of Tuesday, 15 December (Moser, p. 370.23-25).]
§13. The possibility of Adyoc being false 145
problematic and conceptuality of Suarez himself, Thomas, and there-
fore Aristotle, entered the modern era. In the most recent edition of
Aristotle’s Metaphysics (Oxford, 1923), W. D. Ross says that chapter 10
“has little to do with the rest of book IX,”*! the theme of which is po-
tency and act. And Ross says it is hard to decide between Bonitz and
Jaeger. That is generally characteristic for Ross’s edition.

Jaeger himself, in his great book Aristoteles. Grundlegung einer Ge-
schichte seiner Entwicklung (1923),’*has fundamentally, if quietly, given
up his early thesis and shifted to that of Bonitz, although without pro-
viding any reasons. Now the situation has gotten even more obscure,
because at the same time Jaeger explicitly appeals to his own earlier
book. Now he no longer talks about an appendage or a passage out of
context. Rather, with Bonitz he says that Aristotle puts this chapter
about truth “at a fitting place, namely between the end of the doctrine
of potentiality and at the beginning of doctrine of the actuality of the
supersensible, which was intended to follow immediately”; and “ [this
insertion, which likewise must have been made on the occasion of the
introduction of Z-H-@,] clearly shows once again Aristotle’s attempt
to arrange a gradual ascent up the scale of being to immaterial
essence.”** Earlier he had brusquely dismissed the idea of a gradual
increase in ontological content. The turn-about is explained by the
fact that Jaeger is now attempting to reconstruct Aristotle’s basic de-
velopment. Why truth is a “level of being” and even of “act” is just as
unclear here as it was in his earlier work, when he claimed there was
no gradual increase in ontological content.

So Jaeger’s clarification of the question has not gotten any further
than did Bonitz or Thomas Aquinas. The uncertainty about whether
this chapter can be assigned to the ensemble of the other chapters, and
the obscurity of justification, [174] are merely an index of the fact that
the problematic of being and its elementary connection with the phe-
nomenon of truth are basically not understood. Before advancing
vague philological conjectures about how these texts belong together
on the basis of their content, it is requisite that we first understand
phenomenally the inner connection between the interpretations of
being and truth. That is, we must philosophically master the relevant
content of these problematic texts. I have intentionally introduced
these discussions so as to make it clear, first, that the understanding of

31. [Aristotle, Metaphysica, ed. W. D. Ross (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1924; 2nd
edition, 1963), vol. 2, p. 274.]

32. [Werner Jaeger, Aristoteles. Grundlegung einer Geschichte seiner Entwicklung
(Berlin: Weidmann, 1923), pp. 211ff.; translated as Aristotle: Fundamentals of the
History of His Development, trans. Richard Robinson (London: Oxford University
Press, 1934; 2nd edition, 1948), pp. 204ff.]

33. [Ibid., p. 212 / tr. 205. The bracketed words appear in Jaeger’s text.]
146 Part I
Greek ontology and the problem of truth depends on our ability to get
inside this chapter; and second, to show the kind of basic questions
that can be hidden behind seemingly insignificant questions like
whether a chapter belongs to a book.

To facilitate our interpretation of the chapter, we preface it with a
translation that has already grown up within that interpretation. I
must emphasize that all the textual difficulties of the passage have not
been eliminated from the following translation and interpretation.
Here I cannot go into individual explanations of, or even possible dis-
agreements with, other efforts at interpreting the text on the part of
Bonitz, Schwegler, or Ross.**

* * *
Translation of the text?

I. The problem: Being and uncoveredness in synthetic beings.

1051a34-b2, 6: Viewpoints for studying being. Uncoveredness.

“Beings” and “non-beings” are understood {in their being} in one
instance in terms of the forms of the categories, in another instance in
terms of possibility {i.e., not-being-there as not-yet-being-there} and
actuality {thereness simpliciter} of the being or non-being {i.e., its op-
posite} intended in those categories.

But when a being is understood in the most proper sense of all—in
its uncoveredness and coveredness— {we now skip to b5}, the question
arises: When is there, and when is there not, [175] that which we are
calling “uncovered” and “covered-over”? We have to investigate what
we mean by these terms. {Now back to the lines we skipped above.}

b2-5: Preliminary determination: uncovering in Adyoc.

As regards [composite] beings themselves, their most proper being
is grounded in their state of being-together and/or being-apart.

Therefore, one uncovers when one takes {“has” present} what-is-
apart in its apartness, and what-is-together in its togetherness.

34. [Here the lecture of Monday, 14 December 1925, draws to a close, to be fol-
lowed by Heidegger’s lecture of Tuesday, 15 December, which opens with an 800-
word summary (Moser, pp. 368-71) that is omitted in GA 21. At the end of his 14
December lecture (Moser, pp. 367-368), Heidegger notes that Metaphysics 1X 10 is
divided into two parts, “I. The exposition of the problem” and “II. The answer to
the question about the being of beings insofar as it is interpreted in terms of truth
or uncovering.” ]

35. In this translation, [writes Heidegger,] I place clarifications and paraphrases
in wing-brackets. The translation does not aim at being linguistically polished but
aims at precision in expressing the meaning that belongs to an issue-oriented
discussion of its content. In that regard, compare and contrast Aristoteles Meta-
physik, trans. Adolf Lasson (Jena: E. Diederichs, 1924).
§13. The possibility of Adyoc being false 147

On the other hand, one covers them over when, in taking them as
this or that, one relates to them in a way opposite to how they are.

b6-9: The foundation of uncoveredness in beings themselves.

You are white not because we {by uncovering} take you in your
presence-there as white. Rather, you are white because of your pres-
ence-there as white.

That is, only if our speech shows what-is-there do we uncover.

b9-13: The being of composite beings as their uncoveredness. Being as
synthesis and unity.*°

Now some beings are always-together and {in their being} have no
possibility of being taken-apart; other beings are equally always-apart
and have no possibility of being taken-together; and finally, there are
other beings that admit of both of these opposed states {i.e., they can
be-together as well as not-together}.

Granted the above, {we may deduce that} being means being-
present-with {one being present with the other} and unity, and non-
being means not-being-present-with {one not being present with the
other} and multiplicity.

b13-17: Two kinds of Aoyoc and their respective trueness and
falseness.

Now, in the cases where {and for the very reason that} beings can
be together as well as apart, the same opinion about something as
something and the same declarative indication of something as some-
thing may at one time uncover and at another time cover-over.

The [same] statement itself can uncover at one moment and mis-
represent at another.’’ But in the case of beings that are incapable
[176] of being other than what they are, the statement does not un-
cover at one moment and cover-over at another.

Instead, the same statement is always uncovering or misrepresenting.

II. The answer to the problem. Uncoveredness and the being of

beings in its most proper form (1051b17-1052a11).
b17-22: The being and uncoveredness of non-synthetic beings.

Now regarding being and non-being, and being-uncovered and
being-covered-over, what do these mean in the case the dovv0eta—

36. [During his lecture (Moser, p. 373.16), Heidegger glossed this paragraph
with: “Here Aristotle determines ‘being’.”]

37. It is so due to the thing being uncovered as well as to its kind of being,
which is wetaBoAn [change]. That is why the same statement can uncover at one
moment and misrepresent at the next, even while remaining the same statement.
The identical statement is true now but false later.
148 Part I
things that lack any synthesis {as well as the unification that comes
from synthesis}?

There is nothing to be synthesized {in these cases}, and so we cannot
speak of “being” [Sein] when something-is-together-with versus “non-
being” [Nichtsein] when something-is-not-together-with—the way we
can say, for instance, that being-together-with pertains to white in rela-
tion to a piece of wood, or incommensurability pertains to the diagonal
of a square.

Similarly uncovering and covering-over occur differently in the
present case [of the non-synthetic] than in the previous case [of the
synthetic].

b22-33: Uncoveredness and coveredness in non-synthetic beings. The
crux of the chapter.*®

Just as “uncoveredness” is different {in aovvOETa}, so too is being.
In the case of non-synthetic beings, “uncoveredness” {“and covered-
over-ness”—this phrase makes absolutely no sense in the text, and Iam
convinced it was not written by Aristotle but inserted by a scribe} en-
tails just touching and addressing oneself to”? the unhidden.

{Affirmation—attribution of something to something—is not the
same as purely and simply addressing oneself to it.}

In these cases {of non-synthetics}, not-apprehending is the same as
not-touching.

Being-deceived is not possible in uncovering a pure “whatness” in
itself {Being-deceived does not pertain to “whatness.” It can occur
only if one’s gaze falls} on something that is just incidentally present
{with the “whatness”}.

It is the same with whatever is there in-and-of-itself without any
synthesis. In that case, too, it is impossible to be deceived.

Moreover, all these things are just there in the manner of simple,
constant already-there-ness, without any “not yet” or “a moment ago,”
for if that were ever the case, things that are simply there would nec-
essarily come to be and pass away.

But being*® does not come to be or pass away; because if it did, it
would have to come to be from something {i.e., being would be de-
rived from a being}.

38. [Heidegger provides this note in Moser (p. 375.20-21), and in the Weiss
typescript (p. 92.26).]

39. [Addressing oneself to itin a simple “utterance.” Aristotle contrasts katapacic
(“affirmation,” attributing something to something) and ddotc (from nut, a sim-
ple “utterance”), which can be taken as equivalent to the Latin dictio. Heidegger
translates the latter as Ansprechen, “straightforwardly addressing oneself to some-
thing” or “simply referring to it.”]

4O. [Here Heidegger uses Sein to translate Aristotle’s tO dv.]
§13. The possibility of Adyoc being false 149

Clearly whatever is being [Sein] in and of itself and whatever is al-
ways-already-there*!—of such things there is no deception but only
apprehension or non-apprehension. [177]

In this realm of {simple} beings, one looks for what something al-
ways is and not whether it is this way or that {or is this kind of thing
or that}.

b33-35: Again, the being and uncoveredness of synthetic beings.

Therefore, being [Sein] in the sense of uncoveredness, and non-be-
ing [Nichtsein] in the sense of covered-over-ness are one— [each is] a
unity of synthesis.

In the first case, the unity {of the being} is a matter of synthesis. If
{one synthesizes} what is together, there is uncoveredness.

If one synthesizes what is not together, there is covering-over. {But
such unifying can uncover only if the being of the entity is that way
itself, namely, determined by oVvOeot<.}

1052al-4: The being of non-synthetic beings.

In the second case, where that is not so {i.e., where the being of the
entity is not determined by ovVv@eotc}, uncoveredness does not entail
the unity of synthesis {it is not a matter of dtavoetv nor of the “as” that
is proper to an act of determining}.

Instead, here uncoveredness is simply a matter of apprehending
being.

There is no covered-over-ness at all, not even deception.

There is only not-apprehending {cayvota}.

But that is not to be understood as a form of blindness, because in
the arena of apprehension {acts of understanding and determining in
thought}, what would correspond to blindness would be an utter in-
ability to apprehend at all. {That is only one kind of a&yvota or not-
apprehending, one that remains on the level of voetv as dtavoetv.}

a4-11: Applying the above to possible kinds of statements. Essential
and factual truths.

It is also obvious that in the field of what cannot be otherwise, there
is no possibility of being deceived about the “when” {of time}, if from
the start one already understands and means the unchangeable.

For example, if we assume that by its very nature a triangle does
not change, then we will not think that the sum of the angles is oc-
casionally equal to the sum of two right angles and occasionally not,
because that means the triangle would have to change. Such a state-
ment could only mean that a thing can be this way for one person but
not for another.

Al. [Aristotle: etvai tt kat Evégyetat.]
150 Part I

For example, no even number is a prime number. Some numbers
are prime numbers, and some are not.

But there is no possibility of stating anything similar about what
makes a number be only one {in the sense of being always identical to
what it is}.

One cannot maintain that some numbers admit of a certain what-
ness and others do not [178] {in fact there is no “some’}.

Rather, one will either directly uncover or cover-over insofar as the
being does not change but always comports itself the way it is.*

* * *
Interpretation of the text.

The preceding translation has already introduced some divisions
into this passage. In order to facilitate an overview of the whole, let us,
prior to interpreting the text, briefly lay out the divisions according to
their content.

The chapter falls into two major divisions:

I. 1051a34-b17

The first division provides an exposition of the problem: getting the
proper being of beings from an interpretation of uncoveredness, and
doing so while also invoking and taking up the previous interpreta-
tion of being as ovoia (presence) and dUvaptc-evégyeta (not-there-
ness and pure and simple thereness).

II.1051b17-1052al11

The second division provides the answer: it determines the kind of
uncoveredness of beings within those two modes of being—ovoia and
évéoyeta—and consequently determines the most proper being of be-
ings. Likewise there is the application of this to “truths” in the sense
of uncovering statements about always-existing beings.

We will now look at some particular points.

Outline of the text
I. The problem: Being and uncoveredness (1051a34-b17).

1051a34-b2, 6:
Possible viewpoints in studying being, the most proper of
which deals with uncoveredness.

b2-5:
In a parenthetical sentence, uncoveredness is determined in
a preliminary way in terms of the uncovering performed by
Adyos.

42. [Here Heidegger draws to a close his lecture of Tuesday, 15 December 1925,
to be followed by his lecture on Thursday, 17 December. |
§13. The possibility of Adyoc being false 15]
b6-9:
The essential foundation of uncovering in beings themselves:
here uncovering is what it properly is.
b9-13:
The structure of beings themselves is understood in terms of
uncoveredness. Being: synthesis and unity.
b13-17:
This text provides a sharper characterization of the possible
trueness and falseness of Adyoc. Statements are divided into
(a) those that can be true as well as false (sometimes they
are one way, sometimes the other); and (b) those that are ei-
ther true or false (always one or the other).
II. The answer: Uncoveredness and the being of beings in its
most proper form (1051b17-1052a11).
Up to this point, being and uncoveredness have been consid-
ered with regard to those beings whose being is determined by
“synthesis” and “unity.” Now, however: [179]
b17-22:
The question of the being and uncoveredness of things that
cannot be understood, in themselves, by way of a synthesis
of something with something else.
b22-33:
First of all, determining the possible uncoveredness of [non-
synthetic] being. Here the opposite of uncoveredness is not
coveredness, but lack of access for direct apprehension.
b33-35:
Then again, the being and uncoveredness of beings determined
by synthesis: a further characterization (cf. 1051b9-13, above).
al-4:
The being of things that are not determined by synthesis.
a4-11:
Applying the above to possible kinds of statement. Essential
truth and factual truth.”

Our thematic interpretation of this chapter in connection with the
preceding chapters and books [of the Metaphysics] must show (a) how
being first attains its full and proper determination by being charac-
terized in terms of the aAnQéc, and (b) to what extent the pinnacle of
the investigation of being is thereby reached, such that this chapter
constitutes the necessary conclusion about that issue.

If this concluding clarification of being is also to be the most proper
one, then it must also take for its theme the being [Seiende] that is con-

43. This is important for the critique of historicity.
152 Part I

stitutive for all beings in their being. This being [Seiende] that, in every
being, is the being [Seiende], or is its being [Sein] (this oscillation of
terms is characteristic) —this being [Seiendes] that makes every being
be what it is, is the essence, the what, from which everything that is has
its origin. That which from the outset always already is in every being
that is there (and which therefore is there in an entirely special way)
must be investigated as and in terms of being [Sein], if being is to be
understood in its most proper sense. The question about being must be
finally directed to essence and its being. In effect, it is the question
about the being of beings.

How are we to determine the being of essences (eid) [180] using
the aAnVéc as our guiding thread? That entails the prior question: In
general how, on the basis of the dAnQéc, are beings to be understood
in terms of their being?

With this prior and introductory question, Aristotle first focuses on
the aAnGéc of the Adyoc, and his answer is: Being means “synthesis”
and the unity (of this synthesis). Non-being means non-synthesis and
multiplicity. Specifically, this is the character of the being of those be-
ings that always are what and how they are, the ddUvata aAAws ExEt—
those which, by the very meaning of their being, cannot be otherwise.

Then against the background of the det év, Aristotle determines the
évdexouevov aAAwS—that which sometimes is composed and some-
times not, that which sometimes has the unity of synthesis, and some-
times the multiplicity of the not-composed.

This understanding of things with an eye to the det Ovta is ade-
quate to the task insofar as essence itself is also an dei Ov. At the same
time, however, this characteristic of being is inadequate from the
viewpoint of the aAnQéc, because essence is something that lacks any
synthesis. In principle, therefore, its being cannot be understood by
way of synthesis and its unity.

How then are we to conduct an interpretation on the basis of the
aAnGéc? If a being in and of itself cannot possibly be synthetic (i.e.,
synthetically unified), then the corresponding act of uncovering that
points out the being, likewise cannot be synthetic. In order to under-
stand, on the basis of the dAnQéc, a being that excludes all synthesis,
we first have to establish what can be said about its state of &AnVEc.
The uncovering of, the unhiddenness of a being that in and of itself is
not composed offers no possibility of seeing anything else in the being
other than that being’s own self. Such uncovering offers no possibility
of focusing on something else in the being, or of showing the being in
terms of something else. The being is present simply in and of itself
and “as” itself.

With regard to such a being, the only possible kind of uncovering is
Otyetv and davat, the act of simply touching it and addressing oneself
§13. The possibility of Adyoc being false 153
to it. Aristotle chooses these words to express the pure and simple /av-
ing of something in itself (neither derived from nor veering off toward
some other thing). That which we encounter in such a having is pre-
eminently “near” with a nearness that [181] contains no distance. The
nearness contains only the thing we meet in its own self and nothing
else; in a radical sense there is nothing else but it, purely in itself.

Aristotle stays with the kind of access and uncovering that charac-
terizes the act of touching, and he uses it to clarify the unique way in
which the dovv0eta are encountered. In doing so, of course, he does
not at all mean that uncovering is an act of actual touching, as is
shown by the word that follows, db&vat, which has the sense of dnAovv,
showing. At 1052al Aristotle paraphrases it as voetv, the act of intel-
lectual apprehension. Correspondingly, 1051b25 paraphrases pn
Oryyavetv [not touching it] as ayvoetv [not knowing it]. And at
1052a2, the opposite of [intellectual] apprehension is a&yvota [not
knowing], as contrasted with vontucov [knowable] at a3.

In De anima I 2, we find the words adn... atoOnotc, “touch” as
one form of “sense perception.”“4 Moreover, at De anima II 424al, we
read that to yag atoObaveoOat Taoxetv tt éottv [“Sense perception is
some kind of receptivity.”] But here in Metaphysics V, voetv, which is
pure évéoyeta, is also called a taoxetv.

Aristotle occasionally designates voetv as an atoOnotc, even though
the senses play no role in it. The decisive point is that whatever is un-
covered in atoOnot¢ is had directly in itself. For that, Aristotle uses the
flexible expression Oryyavwv [touching] for the ways [in which the]
intellect functions. At Metaphysics XII 7, 1072b21 we find Otyyavwv
KaL Vow [touching and knowing].”

If we want to determine the being of these beings by using uncov-
ering as our clue, we can do so only by looking at how these beings are
manifested of and by themselves in this uncovering which opens up
entirely the beings it encounters. Our gaze is now directed exclusively
to the thing to be understood, and not to any other thing that might
make the determination possible. Rather, the gaze itself is pure uncov-
ering in such a way that not only does it require no determining [of its

44. [GA 21 (p. 181.13) misreads “B 2” as “B 11,” and accents adr incorrectly. The
Greek text is found at 413b5: “The primary kind of perception, common to all [ani-
mals], is touch.” ]

45. At Metaphysics XI 7, 1072b13, Aristotle also uses this expression “touch” for
the way intellect functions in another very important context, a clarification that
Hegel put at the end of his Encyclopaedia in order to document in a certain way that
he was saying nothing different from what Aristotle says in that text. [See G. W. F.
Hegel, Enzyklopddie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse (1830), ed. Fried-
helm Nicolin and Otto Poggeler (Hamburg: Felix Meiner), p. 463.]
154 Part I

object], [182] but it also cannot require one, because viewing things
in that way would already be tantamount to blocking our access. And
at 1052al, where Aristotle, using the clue of Otyetv and simple voetv,
poses the question about being, he gives the same answer as he does
to the question about the kinds of an uncovering access to these be-
ings. So the answer to the question about truth (uncovering) stands in
for the answer to the question about being—all of this in a discussion
that asks about being in the proper sense. Roughly put: Being is deter-
mined “by means of” thinking, both of them posited as identical.

This formulation, as it might be understood in modern philosophy,
is certainly inadequate, but it is nonetheless noteworthy that it was
precisely Schwegler who wanted to throw this whole chapter out of
the Metaphysics, the very Schwegler, who as a Hegelian should have
had some understanding for the fact that in a certain sense Aristotle
here identifies thinking and being.

Therefore, we have now found a mode of uncovering that distances
itself from the others, insofar as this truth has no possible opposite in
the sense of falsehood. Or more exactly, it is an uncovering for which
there is no covering-over.

c) The three conditions for the possibility of a statement being

false, taken in their interconnection
But what have we gained for the question that now concerns us exclu-
sively: To what extent is ovv@eotc the condition of the possibility of
falsehood? What help have we gotten from discussing a kind of truth
that allows no falsehood as its opposite? With that kind of an issue,
haven't we strayed from the ground of our topic? No, not at all. In fact,
only now do we have the basis for deciding the question. Now we can
take away from the uncovering that allows no covering-over (false-
hood) [183] all that pertains to the possibility of falsehood to the de-
gree that it does.

The uncovering of something that is not a composite in and of itself
has no covering-over as its opposite. As Aristotle says: Being deceived
is not possible. There can only be a not-apprehending (ayvoetv), a not-
acceding, a lack of access to the being in question. But this means first
of all that being deceived entails some access to the being, that is, the
tendency and intention to understand and possess it. In order to be
deceived, I must in general live in the comportment of uncovering. In
a certain sense, I must already have the subject matter if Iam to make
a mistake about it. The first condition of the possibility of deception is
the prior having of something.

I cannot be deceived when it comes to uncovering those “simple”
beings which are always there, because here the only possible uncov-
ering is a direct having of those beings. By the very nature of the case,
§13. The possibility of Adyoc being false 155
the uncovering comportment toward beings that is required if Iam to
be deceived is the uncovering and having of the being itself. But why
cannot covering-over and falsehood get the better of this having of the
being? As will be shown later, it is quite possible for me to live in an
act of uncovering and to have pointed out a being, to know about that
very being on the basis of having pointed it out—it is possible to live in
the knowledge about and truth of the thing and yet be able to fall vic-
tim to deception about the very being that I intend in the act of truth
(i.e., uncovering).

So why isn’t that possible in the case under discussion?

The answer is: Taoat elolv Evegyeta—dvvauet [all these are either
in évégyeta—or in dVvautc]. These simple beings, the ultimate beings
on the basis of which all beings are determined, are simply and di-
rectly present and never “not-yet-present” and thus never not-present.
Their being excludes every possibility of non-presence regarding what
and how they are. These beings are never not-present just as they are.
[184]

No deception is possible because there is no possibility of dissem-
bling. How so? For a being to be disguised, and for the disguising to
result in a mistake (a wrong understanding of the being in question),
the being must be intended at some point. There must be a tendency
to uncover, a specific tendency directed toward the being. But a being
can be disguised only insofar as something can be synthesized with
the being as something. Given that “something,” the being can be seen
and determined-as, and deception means alleging and pretending that
something is something. But nothing can be synthesized with a simple
being because, as simple, the being stands in no need of synthesis with
anything. In fact, here we have an absolute exclusion of the possibility
of synthesis.

The being lacks not only everything that could be put in front of it
to help pass off the disguised being as something that it is not, i.e., to
dissemble it. What’s more, this simple being excludes the very possi-
bility of synthesis with something else. Because it is completely lack-
ing in synthesis, the being cannot be taken as something else. Rather,
when the being is understood, it itself is present there. If you intend
this simple being as itself from the start, and then try to determine it
on the basis of something else, you have already misunderstood the
thing you intended. If you try to determine a simple being in terms of
what it is not, at the very least you cover it over it in what it is.

Let’s take some examples from the field of sense perception, wherein
Aristotle recognizes an analogy with direct [intellectual] perception—
for example, the direct seeing of qualities such as colors. Now if I were
to lay out, in the most extravagant dialectic that you can imagine, the
relations that colors happen to have among themselves, that would
156 Part I
never get me to an understanding of color. So, for example, the rela-
tions and differences of all colors except red would never result in an
understanding of red. I understand red only when I [185] dispose my-
self to see it, and all the relations that red might have to other colors
are of no help. Red is the kind of being that is understood only insofar
as it is taken purely in itself. It’s the same with [modes of being such
as] essence, movement, time, and the like. For these reasons, the op-
posite of understanding a simple being is not-apprehending. Not-ap-
prehending can never be the same as covering something over in an
act of taking-something-for and supposing it to be this or that, because
that would always already entail already having the thing.

But this not-apprehending does not mean having no apprehension
at all. Ayvota does not mean simply the non-presence of vovc as such.
Rather, this a&yvota is founded on the predominance of voetv qua
dtavoetv. It is founded on the disposition to have and grasp the appre-
hended as apprehended only by grasping it as taken apart—d1a— [i.e.,
taking] something in terms of something else, as defined in the propo-
sition: Something is only when it is determined. Something appears
only when Aéyetv functions as dtaAéyeoOat, and not just as pavat.

If dissembling and covering-over are to be possible at all, the being
itself must have an ontological structure such that, on the basis of its
being [Sein] and as the being [Seiende] that it is, the thing offers the
possibility of synthesis, indeed demands synthesis with another being.
That is, the thing must be what it is only within the unity of such a
synthesis.

When the being of a being consists in such a synthesis, there is a
twofold possibility of dissemblance:

1. The being can be synthesized with another being in such a way that
it is always synthesized with one specific thing—and always not
synthesized with another.*® The act of showing something by syn-
thesizing it with something with which it is always not-synthesized
must necessarily cover-over, because in an act of determinate indi-
cation it shows something as something when the thing is never
able to be that way. In this instance, dissemblance is necessarily
based on a possible synthesis, but one that entails the impossibility
of composing that which is always not-composed. [186]

The impossibility of synthesizing what is always divided must be
sharply distinguished from what we mentioned earlier: the abso-
lute exclusion of any synthesis at all within a simple being. In the
present case there certainly is the possibility of synthesis. It is just
46. [In Moser (p. 389), Heidegger offers the example of the incommensurabil-

ity of the diagonal and the side of a square. ]
§13. The possibility of Adyoc being false 157
that this specific synthesis is not possible. In the case of a simple
being the very possibility of synthesizing is excluded, along with
this specific synthesis.

2. In the case of a being that is determined by synthesis with another,
the being can be synthesized with another being that can attach to
it but need not always do so. This is a being that can be this way or
that, and thus different from the way it now is. When it comes to
such a being that can be different from the way it is now, covering-
over is based either in the being itself or in the covering-over com-
portment (ontically or delotically).

(a) A statement about such a being can be false/covering-over as
a result of a change in the subject matter of the statement.
This is an ontic covering-over. The statement itself can remain
the same as regards its content and yet cover-over [because
the thing has changed]. That is, while remaining the state-
ment it is, it can become false.

(b) But the statement can also cover-over by speaking about a
being in terms of what can attach to the being but happens not
to be synthesized with it “at the moment” of the statement.
This is a delotic covering over.*” *8

* * *

Now it has become clear how ovVvO@eotc is the condition of the possibility

of falsehood or covering-over. In the one case, as the [ontic] together-

ness of something with something; and in the other case, as an act of
showing which, along with this to-be-indicated subject matter, co-sees
something that can be synthesized with this subject matter.

This synthetic showing is a showing on the basis of, and is per-
formed within, a focus on something else. The act of showing some-
thing by focusing on something else that has the feature of “can be
together-with,” is what we have already characterized as the deter-
mining act of speaking about [187] something as something—Aoyoc
as a Statement that determines something. This brings to light an inner
connection between the ontological structure of synthesis and of the

47. [“Delotic” translates Heidegger’s neologism delotisch, which is related to the
Greek drnAovv, “to show.” ]

48. [Here the lecture of Thursday, 17 December 1925, draws to a close, to be
followed by Heidegger’s lecture on Friday, 18 December. At the very end of the 17
December lecture, Heidegger said: “[Tomorrow] we will lay out two [more] con-
ditions of the possibility of falsehood and then bring them together with the first
one. Then we will ask about the unitary root of these three conditions of the pos-
sibility. With that, we will actually encounter the possibility of truth and the un-
derstanding of being” (Moser, p. 390.15-22).]
158 Part I

as-structure, which we earlier characterized as the basic hermeneuti-

cal structure.

We may now summarize the three structural conditions of false-

hood.

1. The orientation to the uncovering of things—the prior intending
and having of the subject matter.

2. Within this basic comportment of uncovering—in fact, dominated
and guided by it—there is the showing of the subject matter in terms
of something else. Only on the basis of this structure is there any
possibility of passing something off as something else.

3. At the same time, such showing-something-as-something-else is
based on the possibility of synthesizing something with something.
Before going on with our discussion, let’s take some examples of

deception and the covering-over of beings. Say Iam walking in a dark

woods and see something coming toward me through the fir trees.

“It’s a deer,” I say. The statement need not be explicit. As I get nearer

to it, I see it’s just a bush that I’m approaching. In understanding, ad-

dressing, and being concerned with this thing, I have acted as one
who covers-over: the unexpressed statement shows the being as some-
thing other than it is.

We can point out how the three conditions are present in this

deception:

1. It is necessary that beforehand I already have something given
to me, something coming toward me. If something did not al-
ready encounter me from the outset, there would be no occa-
sion to regard it as... Always already there is a priori disclosure
of world.

2. It is also necessary that, as I approach the thing, I take it as some-
thing. In other words, in the field of everyday experience, I don’t
just stand there, as it were, in the woods and have something
simply and immediately in front of me. A situation like that is
pure fiction. Rather, in an unexpressed way, I encounter some-
thing that I already understand, something that is already artic-
ulated as something and, as such, is expected and accepted in my
way of dealing with the world. [188] Only because I let what-
ever encounters me encounter me on the basis of the act of envi-
sioning something (say, a deer), can that thing appear as a deer.

3. And the encountering-being can show itself to my act of envi-
sioning “as this thing” and “in this way” only because, along
with the encountering-being and the other things present in
this world (particularly in the lived world of “forest”), some-
thing like “a deer” can indeed be present among the trees. This
§13. The possibility of Adyoc being false 159
is so insofar as the encountering-being entails the general possi-
bility of synthesis, a possibility which, with regard to concrete
deception, is always oriented objectively, i.e., includes within it-
self a range of indications. To take the above example, I would
not, in fact, think that what was approaching me was the Shah
of Iran, even though something like that is intrinsically possi-
ble. The Shah is a being that could appear among the trees in a
German forest at night, whereas there is not a chance that I
would see anything like the cubed root of sixty-nine coming
toward me.

These three conditions of the possibility of falsehood are obviously
interconnected. The decisive question is: How? If we find the answer,
then we have to position our investigation to be able to clarify the ori-
gin of falsehood more radically in terms of the unified root of the
conditions of the possibility of falsehood. What is required for that?
Answer: an understanding of the three conditions as a unity in their
common root; a clearer exposition of the connection of the three con-
ditions; and likewise a concept of that which makes the connection
fundamentally possible.

Regarding the connection itself, it is clear that the second condition
is founded on the third. Envisioning a “that as which” is possible only
when there is a possible “other.” But the second condition is founded
equally on the first. The envisioning of a “that as which” is performed
within and for a prior act of already having something, something
that should be able to stand in the “as.” Therefore, the third condition
will also be connected with the first.

To be sure, this is only a formalistic argument; empty deductions like
this, made with an acumen that is finally blind, [189] only give the il-
lusion that they mean something when in fact they get us basically no-
where. It may be indisputable that the second condition is founded on
the third and on the first, and therefore that the first is connected with
the third. But is the founding of the second condition on the third the
same as the founding of the second on the first? Is the connectedness of
the first and the third the same as a founding? Or does “founding”
mean something else—and if so, what? We want an understanding that
comes from seeing for ourselves, not formal deductions from empty
propositions! We are asking phenomenologically, and not syllogistically,
whether (a) the second condition is connected with the first and (b) the
third is connected with the first, and what that means.

(a) The connection between the second and first conditions:

The envisioning of an other is carried out within the tendency to
intend and uncover something that is supposed to be determined via
the envisioning of an other—this other that appears to me: a deer. The
revelatory tendency of an act of showing already has in view, from the
160 Part I

outset, the subject matter of the determination; indeed, this persists
throughout. But this act of persisting-in-having-present the about-
which is, of itself, not yet an act of determining. Rather, it is a simple
and direct having, and in a certain sense a Otyéetv. For in the first place,
all simple beings are, as such, accessible in a Otyetv; but Oryetv itself is
a mode of access not just to simple beings, but to anything that can be
had in the manner of a simple being, namely, as something whose
determinations have not yet been made explicit. From the beginning,
the about-which is the focus of attention precisely in the mode of not
yet having its determinations made explicit—and as such, it is held
onto as the basis upon which the act of having-by-determining be-
comes explicit.

Thus the that-about-which appears as something that encounters
me within a persisting Otyetv, as something that is already uncovered
from the outset, as something approaching in the woods. Envisioning
an “as” operates within an uncovering and a holding-uncovered that
already dominates such envisioning. The second condition of false-
hood operates within the first.

(b) What may we say about the third condition, the ontological
structure of the composite and its relation to the first condition? The
ontological structure of being-composed does not pertain to beings
that encounter us in a Otyetv, and yet at the same time, [190] Aristotle
understands it as €v. What does év mean here? It is the unity of some-
thing present and of something present-together-with-it. Composite-
ness is the state of being-together-with, which is possible only within
the unity of a more fundamental, underlying presence. The differen-
tiation between what is present and that as-which we encounter it (a
deer) is such only within the unity of a presence that encompasses and
precedes the differentiation and that lets the present being appear as
differentiated. The év indicates a prior presence within which alone
presence-together-with is possible as a mode of presence. The third
condition of falsehood is therefore founded on an original phenome-
non, a primary presence.

Now, do these two phenomena*’—the one to which the second con-
dition is to be traced (prior uncoveredness) and the one to which the
third condition goes back (prior presence) —themselves have a primary
connection? The prior presence of a simple being, of the being of what-
ever encounters us, is related to that thing’s prior disclosedness, which
sustains the act of envisioning. Aristotle says: being “is” uncoveredness.
He lets “being” be substituted for the primary uncoveredness found in
Oryetv. At b24, he determines the aAnGéc of a simple being via Oryetv,

49. [Here I correct GA 21 (p. 190.13) in light of the Moser transcript (p. 403.20-
23) and the Weiss typescript (p. 101).]
§14. The authentic determination of being 161
and at 1052al, where he asks about the being of simple beings, Aristotle
again has recourse to direct voetv—Otyetv. Thus uncoveredness takes
over answering the question about being. One of the characteristics of
the being of beings, and especially of the being of the most proper be-
ings, the simple, is determined by means of uncoveredness.

Thus, the second and the third conditions of the possibility of false-
hood are both founded on the unified togetherness of being and un-
coveredness. How is this togetherness itself to be understood? What
must being itself mean, and how does that let us understand uncov-
eredness as a characteristic of being, indeed as the most proper char-
acteristic? And does it explain why beings must finally be interpreted,
as regards their being, in terms of uncoveredness? [191]

§14. The presupposition for Aristotle’s interpretation of

truth as the authentic determination of being
If we have understood what presupposition must be made, and what
meaning of being must be presumed, so that uncoveredness or truth
can signify a mode of being, then we have also understood the unify-
ing bond to which the conditions of possibility of falsehood lead back.
Aristotle did not ask why uncoveredness or truth is and can be the
determination of being—in fact, the most proper determination. He
simply enacted this determination. But if we want to understand the
issue, if we want to interpret and appropriate it in an authentically
philosophical manner, we have to get behind Aristotle’s enactment
and explain it in terms of the unexpressed presuppositions—the unex-
pressed, implicit understanding of being—in Aristotle and the Greeks.
Whenever thinkers like Aristotle and Plato uttered the proposition (or
at least operated within the interpretation) that truth equals being or is
the most authentic mode of being, we may safely assume that, in doing
so, What they saw and had in mind was a certain phenomenal context.
The only question is whether this connection was explicit for them
and whether they were methodically conscious of the hidden presup-
positions that this connection entails.

We ask: What does being mean such that truth can be understood as
a characteristic of being? As we have pointed out, Aristotle in Metaphysics
IX 10 introduced the idea that the being of a synthetic being means
presence-unto: the presence-together of something with something in
the unity of a present being. This unity, this primary presence that
precedes and grounds presence-together, must be understood as pres-
ence, presenting [Anwesenheit, Prasenz]. Why? If being means and
(mostly implicitly) is understood as [192] presenting or presence, then
the genuine and corresponding act of relating to beings as beings is
162 Part I

one that, gua relating, also has a pres-ential character. But an act of
relating is pres-ential not insofar as it is merely present the way a men-
tal event is, of which (it is commonly held) Iam immediately aware.
Likewise it is not presentative insofar as the presentative character of
an act of relating is basically no different from the presentative char-
acter of a thing. Rather, the act of relating to something must have its
presentative character as an act of relating. An act of relating, taken as
such, is presentative insofar it means “rendering present” or, as we say
in German, Gegenwartigen: “making-something-present.” By making-
present, the act of relating lets a present thing encounter us.

Corresponding to the act of making-present or rendering present
there is the presence of the thing that underlies and fulfills the mak-
ing-present, the thing that gets uncovered and disclosed in the very
act of making-present. In the case of deception, as we have said, the
supporting structure and primary condition of the deception is the act
of constantly letting the already-given encounter me. This constant
letting-something-encounter-me is nothing but the simple and direct
making-present of something in its immediate presence, specifically
something that is already there prior to its representation. This act of
making-present in which I constantly live—and making-present specifi-
cally in the mode of awaiting—offers the possibility that something
can encounter me; that is, it offers the possibility that a present being
is uncovered and can be present.

“Making-present” means the very same as “letting a present being
encounter us in a now-moment [Gegenwart].” What gets disclosed in
the act of making-present is thereby understood as something we en-
counter in a now-moment, something that, in this now-moment, can
appear in its presence. But the presence of the thing we encounter
need not be already and completely present-now, that is, it need not be
completely uncovered. The only thing that is completely present is
something that we encounter in an act of pure making-present, there-
fore something that, in itself and in its presence, can offer nothing
except that as which it is present. Pure making-present or presenting is
of such a nature that, [193] in it there is nothing about the thing-to-
be-uncovered that is not now-present. The thing to be uncovered is
brought into pure, direct nearness. In other words, the pure uncov-
eredness of beings—as Aristotle understood it with regard to simple
beings—means nothing other than the pure unchanged and un-
changeable presence-now [Gegenwart] of what is present. Uncovered-
ness—in this case, pure presence-now-—is as such the highest mode of
presence. But presence is the fundamental determination of being.
Therefore, uncoveredness—which, as presence-now, is the highest
mode of presence—is a mode of being: it is present presence [anwesende
Anwesenheit] itself.
§14. The authentic determination of being 163

So, what is procured in this making-present (that is, in the uncov-
ering of something) is the uncoveredness or presence-now of some-
thing present; and presence is what characterizes beings themselves
insofar as they are. In other words, being is understood as presence,
and presence and presence-now are understood as presenting. To that
extent, being can and must be determined, via truth, as presence, such
that presence-now is the highest form of presence.

Plato already characterizes being as presence-now. And the word
ovoia (which gets peddled around absurdly in the history of philoso-
phy as “substance”) means nothing other than “presence” in a sense
that we still have to specify. But in all this it is necessary to emphasize
that, yes, the Greeks (Plato and Aristotle) do determine being as ovoia,
but they were very far from understanding what is really entailed in
defining being as presence and as presence-now. Presence-now is a
characteristic of time. To understand being as presence on the basis of
presence-now means to understand being in terms of time.

The Greeks had no suspicion of this unfathomable problematic,
which opens up before us once we have seen this connection [be-
tween being and time]. This connection also lets us explain for the
first time the difference between presence and presence-now, as well
as between presence-now and its modes. At the same time [194] it lets
us understand why it is possible, especially in a preliminary state of
the interpretation of being, to identity the two of them [viz., being and
time]. Once we have understood the internal coherence of under-
standing being in terms of time, we will have a light, as it were, to
shine back over the history of the problem of being (and the history of
philosophy in general) so that finally it acquires some sense.

In that process we come to see that Kant is the only philosopher
who even suspected that the understanding of being and its character-
istics is connected with time. But his very conception of time blocked
him from achieving a fundamental understanding of the problem—
that is, blocked him from asking the question at all. In his Critique of
Pure Reason, Kant did not attain the appropriate basis for synthesizing
the schematism of the concepts of the understanding (where time is
the really fundamental concept) with the basic function of conscious-
ness, transcendental apperception. If this inner connection had opened
up to him, he certainly would have taken an essential step beyond the
whole of ontology—but on an inadequate basis, to be sure.

To take this step you need an understanding of time that breaks
radically with the traditional understanding. Kant, however, held firm
to the traditional concept of time. Not only that, but from the outset
and throughout his entire problematic, he oriented the concept of time
to knowledge and the question about the possibility of knowledge, viz.
intuition. Nonetheless, his discussion of time—and above all the prob-
164 Part I

lem of the schematism, which Kant himself calls wholly obscure—
remains something quite positive, whose fundamental significance
has not been properly exploited even to this day.

The supposedly new concept of time that Bergson put forth by way
of criticism of Kant is a complete misunderstanding of the positive ele-
ment present in Kant.

Our task now is the following: Using our insight into the inner con-
nection between truth—or uncoveredness as presence-now—and
being as presence, we have to clarify [195] the degree to which the
three conditions of the possibility of falsehood are connected among
themselves, so that we can then show that there is falsehood only in-
sofar as there is temporality.”

50. [Here (Moser, p. 410), at the end of part I of the course, Heidegger ends his
lecture of Friday, 18 December 1925, and a three-week Christmas break begins.
He opens the new year and part II of the course with his lecture of Monday, 11
January 1926.]
Part II
a
The radicalized question: What is truth?
(A retrieval of the analysis of falsehood
in terms of its ur-temporality)
§15. The idea of a phenomenological chronology
The conclusion that we have drawn is also an enigma.' In other words,
the conclusion of the preceding analyses has brought us, intentionally
and radically, to the central problematic of philosophy. The conclusion
of the investigation up to this point is not an end but a beginning.

So what does it mean that we now take the preceding investigation
and the phenomena we have articulated—statement, truth, falsehood,
synthesis—and relate them all as a unity back to this phenomenal
context of time? If this kind of interpreting and philosophically un-
derstanding such a trivial phenomenon as the statement really is phil-
osophical, and if we assert it to be such, then can we appeal (if it
makes any sense at all) to Kant? In his Reflexionen, Kant says: “The
business of the philosopher is not to give out rules but to dismember
the secret judgments of common sense.” “The secret judgments of
common sense”—that means those unspoken, unknown, and un-un-
derstood comportments that underlie all the daily comportments of
existence. It is the business of the philosopher to bring these secret
(hidden) judgments of common sense to light, and to do so in a way
that dismembers them.

For Kant, dismembering, ana-lysing, means two things. In the first
place he understands analysis in a very broad, formal sense where it
simply means: to separate an already given thing into its [198] ele-
ments, to divide a particular concrete concept into the component
parts that go to make it up. But “analysis” and “analytic” also have a

1. [Heidegger opened his lecture of Monday, 11 January 1926, with a 1,450-
word summary (Moser, pp. 411-417) which is omitted in GA 21.]
167
168 Part II

broader, fundamental philosophical meaning for Kant: to lead some-
thing back to its “birthplace.” In that case “analytic” means the same
as bringing to light the genesis of the proper sense of a phenomenon,
pressing forward to the final conditions of the possibility of something
already given.

But such an analytic presupposes some directives about the horizon
within which the analysis is to move, so to speak, in order to find the
genetic conditions of a phenomenon and of its possibility. Our thesis is
that truth, being, and consequently falsehood, synthesis, and state-
ment are, in some kind of (for the time being) obscure sense, con-
nected with the phenomenon of time; and this already delineates the
horizon for our philosophical analytic of propositions. Only an inves-
tigation that is adequate to such a philosophical analytic can be con-
sidered to be authentically philosophical.

Traditionally we put our minds at ease regarding logic by saying that
a proposition is something simple and ultimate; it is synthesis and divi-
sion. Finally everyone understands that thesis. But on the other hand
no one understands how there could be any further questions at all re-
garding a determination like this and a phenomenon like the statement.
The point is not just to give you closer contact with a concrete under-
standing of statement and truth, the phenomena that are our topic. It is
much more essential for your philosophical studies and reflection for
you to see that the real problem of philosophy is the “obvious” —“the
secret judgments of common sense.” And perhaps you notice how little
of philosophy, as it has been practiced up to now, is a matter of philo-
sophical reasoning—only in a few circles and to a limited extent—and
how it is dominated much more by common sense. Philosophy can
make good its claim to being a science (in fact the basic science) only if
we drive common sense out of philosophical reasoning. [199]

Let us now take the dogmatic conclusion that we first arrived at and
pose it once again in three theses:

1. Being means presence.

2. Truth means the now-present.

3. Presence and presence-now, as characteristics of presenting [Prdsenz]

are modes of time.’
The analysis of the proposition is now oriented toward time. In other
words, our project will be to clarify the characteristics of time with ref-
erence to the phenomena we have been discussing—truth, falsehood,
synthesis, and statement in its three different meanings. The character-
istics whereby these phenomena are temporal, we call their ur-temporal
2. [Compare with the four theses at GA 21, p. 205.15-17.]
§15. The idea of a phenomenological chronology 169
characteristics. I am intentionally employing this strange usage—
ur-temporal—because the word “temporal” [zeitlich] has been mostly
claimed by natural, pre-philosophical speaking where it simply means
that something runs its course, or happens, or takes place in time. How-
ever, when I say that a phenomenon is ur-temporal I do not mean that
this phenomenon is a process or a movement, much less that it happens
in time. Therefore, “temporal” [zeitlich] in the sense of running its course
in time, is not the same as “ur-temporal” [temporale], which means first
and foremost that something is “essentially characterized by time.”

When we inquire into just how far certain phenomena are essen-
tially characterized by time, we take as our theme their ur-temporal
structure—in a word, their ur-temporality [Temporalitat]. The project of
investigating the ur-temporality of phenomena is one that relates the
phenomena to these very ur-temporal determinations and consequently
(if it is a philosophical investigation) relates them to [ur-]time as such.
This fundamental philosophical examination that has [ur-]time for its
subject matter we call a chronology, indeed a phenomenological chronology.

Natural-scientific awareness also uses the word “chronology,” spe-
cifically for a discipline within history’s auxiliary sciences, one that
deals with things like measuring time in history or issues dealing with
calendars, dating, and so forth. [200] The adjective “phenomenologi-
cal” attached to “chronology” is meant to indicate that this “/ogos-of-
time,” this study of [ur-]time, has a philosophical focus and above all
has nothing to do with the practice or theory of measuring time. The
project of a phenomenological chronology is to study the ur-temporal
determinedness of phenomena—that is, their ur-temporality—and
consequently to study [ur-]time itself.

Let us now place our analysis of the statement within the context of
tasks associated with such a chronology. At the moment we need not
further explain the idea of this chronology as one of the fundamental
areas of research in philosophical science. Least of all need we try to
relate it to the other philosophical disciplines, such as we know them,
so as to project a system of these disciplines with reference to this
chronology. We leave all that aside precisely because it could turn out
that this chronology will shake the traditional disciplines to their very
roots, and so it would have been a senseless exercise to classify things
in the traditional sense. We are interested only in the task that per-
tains to this chronology, quite apart from the role the other disciplines
may have in the system of philosophy.

It’s true that no one until now has staked out the field of this inves-
tigation into chronology. What’s more, the very idea of such an inves-
tigation—and thus of its field—has not even been opened up. The
clearest indication of that is the uncertainty that characterizes the
philosophical employment of the concepts and determinations of time.
170 Part II

Correlated with that is the heavy-handed, unsophisticated way people
usually speak of time and of timelessness versus temporality, as if
these were the simplest things in the world. As I indicated earlier, the
only one who started to grope around in this darkness, but without
managing to see the fundamental significance of his attempt, was
Kant. However, within the very narrow chronological field that he
worked in, Kant already saw [201] the obscurity of the phenomena
that he met there.

One piece of evidence for that is a statement Kant makes in the Cri-
tique of Pure Reason in connection with his explanation of the schema-
tism, and it serves as the rubric for the particular way the problematic
of time emerges for Kant within the Critique of Pure Reason.

This schematism of our understanding with regard to appearances and

their mere form is a hidden art in the depths of the human soul, whose

true operations we can divine from nature and lay unveiled before our

eyes only with difficulty. (B 180-181)

Now, we do not want to naively maintain that the project Kant doubted
could be carried out has in fact been carried out and surpassed. But what
he called obscure and almost inaccessible, we take up as an authentic
philosophical challenge—to shed light on this night and get a grip on
what is there so we can understand it. In this way we will take seriously
the philosopher’s job of “dismembering the secret judgments of com-
mon sense.” In fact, perhaps the phenomena that circle around ur-tem-
porality and time are these secret “judgments” of human reason.

As in every field where Kant’s investigations really latch onto is-
sues, here too, in this field of the problem of time, Kant keeps the ho-
rizons open. The way he carries out his investigations shows that he is
struck by the phenomena, maintains his characteristic reserve in front
of them, and shows his reflective caution about hastily assaulting a
phenomenon. When he reaches his limits, he leaves the problems
there—which is more helpful for later research than forcefully arrang-
ing some half-baked ideas into an imposing system.

Kant’s understanding of time as expressed in the doctrine of schema-
tism remains isolated and was completely misunderstood by the Ideal-
ism that followed. An extreme example of that is Hegel, who expressed
himself on the schematism in his Lectures on the History [202] of Philoso-
phy. The point of the schematism is to show in what way the under-
standing, the spontaneity of reason, can be qualified to determine the
forms of intuition as forms of receptivity. Or more exactly, the point was
to show to what extent the categories as a priori determinations of the
unity of reason can relate to what stands over against it [Gegenstande] as
objects [Objekte]. The question of the connection between understand-
§15. The idea of a phenomenological chronology 171
ing and sensibility leads Kant to look for a mediation, and he finds it in
time. Hegel writes in his Lectures on the History of Philosophy, vol. 3, p. 570:

This connecting [of the two, sensibility and understanding,] is again one of

the most beautiful pages in Kant’s philosophy. Here pure sensibility and

pure understanding, which were formerly expressed as being absolutely
separate and opposed, become united. The outcome is a perceptual-intuitive
understanding or an understanding perception. Kant, however, does not
pull these thoughts together. He fails to perceive and grasp that he has
brought the two elements of knowledge into a unity—the in-itself of a dou-
ble sameness. Knowledge itself is in fact the unity and truth of both mo-
ments. Thought and understanding remain one particular thing and sensi-
bility another; and here the two are bound together in an external, superficial
way, as a piece of wood and a leg might be tied together by a piece of rope.’

That is Hegel’s conception of the meaning of the schematism. He
sees it as merely an extrinsic conjoining of understanding and sensi-
bility. On the other hand he does praise Kant for having brought these
two together at all, for having (in Hegel’s opinion) approximated in
some way the Hegelian idea of the dialectic, although in fact Kant’s
inquiry is totally different. To the degree that Kant does aim at media-
tion here, Hegel praises him. But Hegel has absolutely no understand-
ing of the real meaning, the central problematic, that Kant hit upon in
the schematism.‘

* * *

There are two reasons that primarily and necessarily prevented
Kant from understanding the idea of a chronology—or more exactly,
that denied him a fundamental understanding of what he had de facto
carried out first in the schematism and then in the Doctrine of [203]
Principles. In the first place, the typically rigid separation that Kant
makes between sensibility and understanding prevented him from
being able to connect in any way all that falls on the side of the under-
standing (the transcendental apperception and all the activities of the
understanding) with time. What pertains to sensibility as receptivity
had to be denied to the understanding as spontaneity. Insofar as the
forms of intuition, space and time, belong to sensibility, time is pushed

3. [Cf. Lectures on the History of Philosophy, trans. Elizabeth S. Haldane and
Frances H. Simson (Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1999; repr. from the 1895 edition),
p. 441. Translation is emended here in keeping with Heidegger’s lecture (Moser,
p. 424).]

4. [Here (Moser, p. 427) Heidegger ends his lecture of Monday, 11 January
1926, to be followed by that of Tuesday, 12 January, which opened with a 330-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
172 Part II

completely over onto the side of sensibility. And everything that per-
tains to the understanding—and consequently to the transcendental
apperception, and thus to the ultimate unity of consciousness—is pre-
temporal. In the first place, therefore, it is this gaping chasm that pre-
vents Kant from permitting (or seeing) any temporalities, any ur-tem-
poral phenomena, in the activities of understanding.

A clear proof of this is Kant’s interpretation of the principle of con-
tradiction, where he excludes the temporal determination “at the same
time” from the formulation of this principle. He does so on the grounds
of the following argument:

The principle of contradiction traditionally has its validity as a
principle of formal logic, a principle of analytics.

But because every temporal determination is a synthesis,
there therefore can be no synthesis present in the fundamental
principle of all analytic judgments.

Therefore, the phrase “at the same time” must be excluded
from the formulation of the principle of contradiction.

The second reason that prevents Kant from seeing the transcenden-
tal apperception and the understanding in their ur-temporality is
Kant’s very understanding of the concept of time. Kant’s grasp of the
notion of time operates within the conception that was mediated to
him by the philosophical tradition coming from Leibniz and Newton.
According to them, time (in a very general sense) is the schema for the
ordering and determination of the manifold of what is given in the
receptivity of sensibility. In other words time, taken as this schema-
for-ordering, is limited to and primarily and exclusively related to,
nature. Even Hegel understood time in this sense. [204]

To be sure, Kant’s philosophical interpretation of time is different
from that of Leibniz and Newton, but only in a certain respect. Funda-
mentally and in its essentials, Kant’s interpretation operates on the same
ground as theirs, which in general we can understand as: Time is the
schema for ordering nature. We can take this schema for the ordering of
natural processes in Newton’s sense, where time as the schema-for-or-
dering is itself a res, a being, an existing actuality. Or we can understand
time as this schema-for-ordering, in Leibniz’s sense, as an ordo, an order-
ing in general, the being of which is not determined any further than
that. Or we can interpret this schema-for-ordering in the Kantian sense,
as a form of intuition. But in all of these cases the concept of a schema-
for-ordering is thought to pertain to natural processes, to succession.

In other words, this is the same conception of time that Aristotle
uncovered and determined for the first time in his Physics, where time
is encountered and understood with regard to the experienced objec-
tive world. Seen with regard to the world, worldly processes, and the
§15. The idea of a phenomenological chronology 173
kind of determination that pertains to them, time in the sense we just
mentioned is something just there on hand, and it has the possibility
of being philosophically interpreted in various ways.

But is this approach to time, i.e., with regard to the objective world
and its processes, the only approach? Or is the primary and normative
approach to be found in other possible approaches? These are ques-
tions that we have to ask, of necessity, in a fundamental explanation
of the phenomenon of time. Otherwise we abandon the whole prob-
lematic surrounding time to an explanation that remains on the level
of the accidental rather than the fundamental. And in the final analy-
sis, the way of understanding time that first emerged with Aristotle
and then influenced the entire tradition remains on that level—al-
though, as can be shown, there are specific reasons why it does so.

As long as we cling to this concept of time, it will be impossible to
interpret transcendental apperception in the way we want to—viz.,
chronologically, with regard to time. And the same goes for any activity
of understanding, or of consciousness in the broadest sense. [205] But
that’s the same as saying that the chronological problematic—i.e., point-
ing out ur-temporality in the various comportments of existence—can
be worked out only if we first get free of this traditional concept of time
and show that in the final analysis this concept of time is founded on an
original concept of time, and also show that in existence there are spe-
cific elements that make it necessary to understand time in that ur-
temporal sense. If, whenever we discuss time, we remain doggedly ori-
ented to the traditional concept of time, what little we have said about
the connection of being and truth in the preceding lectures will inevi-
tably be misunderstood, or at best not understood at all.

Our theses are:

1. Being means presence.

2. Truth means presence-now.

3. Presence is understood in terms of presence-now.

4. Presence-now is a mode of time.’

What does time mean? We don’t want just any definition of time. Even

if such a definition were possible and available, it would be of no help.

Rather, everything comes down to seeing the phenomenon of time itself

in an original way. That requires its own paths and preparations, its own

preliminary investigations, and it cannot be attained in a single stroke.

We say that time is not merely and not primarily a schema for determin-

ing how changes get ordered. Rather, properly speaking, time is exis-

tence itself. But that is still only a sentence, just as the first thesis above
5. [Compare with the three theses at GA 21, p. 199.5-6.]
174 Part II

is still a merely arbitrary proposition. In fact we know nothing about

time, and we don’t care to be told anything about it.

But let’s stay focused on the subject matter and the project we have
settled on: the analysis of the proposition. Let us especially stay with
the question about the conditions of the possibility of truth and false-
hood in propositions, i.e., the question about the essence and origin of
synthesis. If we do, we will reach the theses we have posited. We are
faced with two possibilities when it comes to developing our investiga-
tion and moving toward a truly philosophical understanding [206] of
the traditional theme of traditional logic.

1. We first ran across the phenomenon of time in a merely dogmatic
set of observations, but now we could explicitly embrace the task of
pointing out and interpreting time. In the course of such a thematic
investigation we would need to reach a point where we clearly see
presence-now as a mode of time. That would give us the basis for
proving how and why we can and must understand presence in
terms of now-presence and for bringing out the connection between
the two. This is the proper issue-oriented way to conduct an inves-
tigation that single-mindedly pursues any new phenomena that
show up, while disregarding any other goals or any concern for a
forced (and finally suspect) systematic unity. But that approach to
the investigation would have to renounce the economy of a lecture
course. If we adopted this approach and pursued the phenomena in
the requisite way, we would never get back to the proposition, the
statement, and truth—at least not this semester.

2. The second possible approach begins with the subject matter we have
chosen and stays with it. However, it takes the conclusion that we ar-
rived at dogmatically and now uses it as a guiding thread. It takes
what we have already uncovered about the structure of statement
and synthesis and tries to see its ur-temporal character. This approach
allows the phenomenon of time to guide our study of the subject mat-
ter. But this approach also has its drawbacks. Yes, we will certainly
understand, within certain limits, those ur-temporal characteristics;
however, in the process; ur-temporality as such will always remain
more or less hidden. To be sure, the guiding thread is determinate,
but it remains obscure—a weak and flickering light with which to
illumine the path of our investigation. But one can easily overcome
this deficiency by getting clear on ur-temporality via an interpreta-
tion of its ur-temporal structures, [207] and thereby getting clear on
time itself, not in isolation but in its ur-temporal function.

In a sense we're repeating what we said earlier, in §12, but now we
have a chronological aim. We need to work out an analysis of the con-
§16. The conditions of the possibility of falsehood 175
ditions of the possibility of propositions and of synthesis in terms of
their ur-temporality. We led synthesis back to the as-structure, and
that means we now have to explain the ur-temporality of the as-struc-
ture. We have characterized this as-structure as a basic hermeneutical
structure of existence. We likewise showed how the “as” of this basic
hermeneutical structure gets leveled down to the “as” which is used to
determine things that are merely there. So, the foundational analysis
of statements in the ensemble will have to show the ur-temporal char-
acter of this process of leveling down, that is, the specific ur-temporal-
ity of the process in which the means-whereby of involvement gets
modified into the mere subject matter of apophantically determina-
tive statements—in short: the ur-temporality of thematizing as such.

These analyses will allow us to clarify the phenomenon of now-
presence and thus its connection with presence. All of this will make
possible a relative understanding of the extent to which being equals
presence and truth equals now-presence. Only in this way will we
acquire the correct means for giving a definitive, philosophical inter-
pretation of Metaphysics 1X 10. And then we will also see the limits,
imperfections, and ambiguities of the Greek inquiry into the problem-
atic of that treatise, as well as the reasons for the obscurity of it. Only
then will we finally be able to answer the questions we formulated in
connection with that treatise (cf. §13-b, above): Why did the Greeks
and all ages thereafter understand that truth meant intuition-truth?
Why must we first and foremost understand intuition-truth as the
basic form of truth? And why does traditional logic, as a consequence,
operate within the specific problematic of this form of truth? [208]

§16. The conditions of the possibility of falsehood
within the horizon of the analysis of existence
Let us briefly recall the three conditions:
1. The tendency to uncover, that is, the prior already-having of some-
thing;
2. The determination via “as” (the delotic® synthesis); and
3. The togetherness of beings (the ontic synthesis).
In our earlier investigation, our aim was set on the interconnection
and unifying root of these conditions. According to what we finally
said, the unity of the conditions is grounded in ur-temporality.
We establish the interconnection between the conditions not by syl-
6. [See page 157, note 47, regarding “delotic.”]
176 Part II

logistic argument, but by insight into the phenomenon itself. We pursue
the three conditions individually in their ur-temporality. But if they are
all originally interconnected within ur-temporality, then the more our
analysis gains insight into the ur-temporality of one of them, the more
clearly we will see the others as well. Or more precisely, we will see the
whole context of being that they delimit: the comportment of existence
becomes visible.

We characterized the first condition in two ways: 1. the prior-hav-
ing of something, and 2. the tendency to uncover. And we spoke of
this condition on two occasions. The first time was in our analysis of
the statement (§12), when we said that the statement is grounded in a
prior understanding. We gave the example of chalk: The prior under-
standing concerns the concrete act of writing as an involvement-with.
In that analysis we did not consider whether the statement that is
grounded in such a prior understanding was true or false. We took as
an example a true statement: “This chalk is white.”

We also treated this same phenomenon when speaking about de-
ception (the example of the deer). There we began with a false state-
ment, but again we showed that, as a statement (whether it be explic-
itly asserted or not), it too was grounded in a prior knowledge. But in
this case our analysis went further. We pointed out the structure of
[209] this prior knowledge (GA 21, pp. 192ff.). We said that the prior
act of letting something encounter us is a comportment within which
we constantly live and in which the tendency to uncover the encoun-
tering thing can also lie as an interpretation and determination that
goes after the thing. The prior letting-encounter and the prior-having
of something ground the tendency to uncover whatever is already-had
in these ways. “Tendency” is a mode of being-disposed for the explicit
“approach” of something. And this tendency in turn grounds and sup-
ports the mode of uncovering that thing.

These phenomena—letting something encounter, the prior-having
of something, and the tendency to [uncover] something—must be
shown in their ur-temporality. But to do so we must have secured the
very horizon within which we can meet them. In other words, these
phenomena have to be brought back to the context of being where
they are what they are. But this context-of-being is one to which the
statement belongs, whose conditions of being we are now pursuing.

We said that we live constantly in this state of letting-things-
encounter-us. This, along with the already-having of something and
the tendency to [uncover] something, are comportments of ourselves,
i.e., comportments of the being [Seienden] that we are and that we
call existence. Therefore, these comportments are ways that exis-
tence can be, ways in which it is as it is and can be as existence.
Therefore, we understand the aforementioned phenomena as modes
§16. The conditions of the possibility of falsehood 177
of the being of existence, and we give them corresponding termino-
logical determinations.

The constant letting-encounter / already-having of something is exis-
tentially and a priori a being-unto and a being-familiar-with something.
Tendency-unto is a being-out-unto something. Clearly, then, the second
condition of the possibility of falsehood—viz., the determining by way
of the “as,” or taking a look at, or the delotic synthesis—is also to be
understood as a way that existence is.

The third condition concerns the entity that is to be understood, first
of all by way of knowledge of the world. “World” can also mean exis-
tence to the extent that it is a [210] being [viz., ourselves] about which
we can deceive ourselves—and often do, to a large measure in acts of
self-deception. We don’t have to be ourselves. There can also be (and first
of all is) the being that we ourselves are not, but to which we relate and
with regard to which we have a [certain mode of] being.’ To come back
to the first condition, mostly we have merely changed the terminology
[e.g., being-unto, being-familiar-with, etc.]. This is not insignificant be-
cause it shows that, in clarifying the phenomena we understand by
these terms, the goal must be to interpret the “being” that presses to the
fore in such expressions as being-already-with and being-out-unto.®

* * *

Therefore, we will clarify the structure of existence to the extent that
is especially necessary for understanding these comportments. The
lack of such an analysis of existence is ultimately why ur-temporal
phenomena remain in the dark and haven't been understood up until
now. We thereby come face-to-face with a task. .. . No, to put it more
exactly: Constantly throughout this entire course, we have been really
working at an analysis of this phenomenon of existence, but without
saying so explicitly. In our introductory investigations of psycholo-
gism we raised the question: When, in a concrete judgment, the real
act of judgment is separated from the ideal content of judgment, how
are the two related to each other? There we formulated the question
in such a way that we had to ask “What then constitutes the proper
connection-of-being between ideal and real being?” and more pre-
cisely, “Is it even possible to ask what constitutes the bridge?”

Now this question has become concrete for us. To be sure, we al-
ready have readily available terms for such analyses of comportments,

7. [Heidegger is referring, of course, to everyday “fallenness” and inauthen-
ticity. ]

8. [Here (Moser, p. 444) Heidegger ends his lecture of Tuesday, 12 January
1926, to be followed by that of Thursday, 14 January, which opened with a 320-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
178 Part II

taken in the broad sense of what we now call “conscious processes” or

“lived experiences,” and all of these terms naturally already harbor a

certain conception of the structure of existence. Traditional episte-

mology, ethics, and so forth have done a lot for the analysis of these
phenomena, but the truly crucial investigations [211] have been lack-
ing up until now. These investigations precede every concrete analy-
sis, and once and for all they determine, in terms of itself, the being

[Seiende] whose comportments are especially to be studied. For the

most part, when analyzing existence, philosophers work with catego-

ries that are indifferent to existence or that are drawn from contexts
of being that genuinely have nothing to do with it.

Given the aim and particularly the limitation of our project, our anal-
ysis of existence now confronts us with particular and principled diffi-
culties. One could say, of course, that this existence—which we our-
selves are, each one of us—is truly and properly the closest thing to us.
As Augustine has already asked in his Confessions, book 10, chapter 16:

Quid autem propinquius meitpso mihi?

What is closer to me than myself?

And in the same chapter where he poses that question, he also says:
Ego certe laboro hic et laboro in meipso: factus sum mihi terra difficultatis et sudoris
nimil.

I work hard here, I word hard on myself {when I study consciousness, the

soul}, and I have become to myself a field of hard labor and immense per-

sonal struggle.

Let us keep these thoughts present to mind as we take up the analysis of
existence in an effort to really see at least some of its structures. In this
context it is not a matter of providing definitions or descriptions that can
be understood in a very general way. It’s a matter of really bringing
structures out into the clear so that we can then see, within the horizon
of those structures, what we have been calling ur-temporality.

With the letting-encounter and already-having of something, we
have met up with the clarification of deception. In order for me to be
able to be deceived, in order for something to misrepresent itself to me
and to appear as something it is not, the thing that so appears has to
have already encountered me. It has to appear, in some way or other,
precisely «during» the misrepresentation. To put it concretely: I have to
be moving in the forest, for example, or if not in the forest [212] then
someplace else, if I am to be able to be deceived about things in the
world and in the knowledge of the world. That need not mean that such
§16. The conditions of the possibility of falsehood 179
an act of letting-encounter must have been explicitly performed before
deception can occur. Rather, it means that if I am deceived, if1 fall into
deception, I first of all must have been a priori with something in the
world. This fact of being a priori with something of the world, this being-
unto and being-with a world, is not just the ground of (i.e., what makes
possible) deception. Rather, it belongs to my existence itself. It’s not the
case that I first must bring myself into the state of letting-something-
encounter-me. In fact, that’s not even possible, since insofar as I am at
all, I already have an ontological relation to a world, in fact to my own
world, and this ontological relation belongs to the determination of the
being of my “I am.” Insofar as existence is its own ek-, its own “out
there,” it is in a world. The word “being” [Sein] in the term “being-out-
there”? means, among other things (but not exclusively) being in the
world. It is entirely wrong to think that philosophical statements deal
with human beings and their relation to the world. Basically we’d have
everything backwards if we understood this phenomenological state of
affairs as if human beings first of all were beings unto themselves and
then, in addition to this, also had a relation to the world. Being-in-the-
world (of course we will have to determine the meaning of this better)
already is the being of each human being.

This letting-the-world-encounter-us, this a priori having-the-world,
does not engage existence only once in a while and then disappear
again. Already-being familiar with a world underlies every one of exis-
tence’s possibilities-of-being qua possibilities-of-human-existence. This
already being familiar with the world bifurcates, branches out, is dis-
seminated and dispersed into a multitude of ways of being involved
with whatever is there. It directs itself to what is there, takes account of
it, exploits it, uses it, transforms it, augments it, and so on and on. Even
calculating and knowing the world are a mode of this involvement with
the world. Mostly they remain fused with an involvement-with that is
not [213] merely and not primarily cognitive. Nonetheless, they can
also become free of that, so that existence engages itself in knowing the
world as an autonomous way of being involved with it.

This structure of existence —being-in-the-world—is an essential one
but not the only one. Its priority (its “constancy” —its a priori facticity)
is a wholly proper priority.

For the most part statements maintain themselves primarily within
a particular involvement-with, that is, they are carried out on the basis
of being-in-the-world. However, with that the phenomenon of being-
already-with is still not adequately understood. We have to distin-
guish between the structure of being-in-the-world in general and its
basic comportment in which this structure, as existential, maintains

9. [That is, Dasein, in the non-technical sense. ]
180 Part II

itself. Every particular involvement-with happens on the basis of be-
ing-in-the-world. But this constantly prior being unto and in the world
is also an a priori being with the world. This, by way of contrast to
existence as being-in-the-world, is a very special form in which this
structure is enacted, namely: As in-the-world, existence has a priori
given itself away to the world in using it, exploiting it, and so on. Exis-
tence not only “is” in the world in an essential way, but also “is” fallen
into the world. The world encounters us not as some indifferent “place-
in-which,” where existence operates. Existential being unto the world
is a matter of being essentially assigned [Angewiesensein] to the world
and hence it is an a priori being-fallen into the world.

A-priori-being-with the world is neither an indifferent way of being
unto the world nor a mere dwelling in it in the sense of observing it,
staring at it. Rather, this with-the-world means being essentially as-
signed to it, being absorbed in it, operating in it as having been handed
over to it. Human existence’s way of being with its world is never any-
thing like the way things are with each other qua juxtaposed. This kind
of being-with-each-other (for example, the way the chair is there with
the door) is the way that two things, both of which belong to the world,
are next to each other. Here too, because our language is not formed
according to the rules of formal logic, [214] it is a bit inconsistent.

Imagine a walking stick leaning against the door or wall. One might
say that the one touches the other. But on closer reflection we should
not speak of “touching”—and not because we could show that there is
ultimately some space between the two. Rather, on principle the
walking-stick does not and never can touch the wall, even if there
were absolutely no distance between it and the wall. For that to hap-
pen, the wall would have to be able to encounter, and be encountered
by, the walking-stick as a thing in the world. One thing can touch
another only if it is a being that—as such, intrinsically, and of its own-
most being—has its world. Only in that way can it touch another being,
and only thus can the thing touched be uncovered in the touching
and become accessible in its being as something there. So we see that
in saying “Two things touch,” we are taking existence’s way of being
unto the world and transferring it to a thing that appears within the
world and therefore, in itself, is worldless.

On the other hand the ontological relations of worldly things and
events can also get transferred to existence. An example of that: when
we speak of the “movement” of thinking and neglect to say what
“movement” means here or could mean. Most often we mention only
this transference of world-oriented discourse to existence. Existence’s
being-with is not, therefore, juxtaposition, i.e., a continuous or discon-
tinuous filling up of space.

Being-with is one way the structure of being-in-the-world is enacted.
§16. The conditions of the possibility of falsehood 181
It has its own specific “how,” which prescribes that we must understand
existence’s specific being unto its world as concern for that world. This
is not just any characteristic of existence, but one that is determined by
existence’s basic way of being. Only with reference to this basic way of
being can we phenomenally understand a-priori-being-with in a broad
enough way to bring out its ur-temporal structure.

Some might think that when we define existence in terms of the
structure of being-in-the-world, we are grounding our interpretation
of existence in some general biological structure. [215] This character-
istic of being-in-the-world, they might say, pertains in a certain sense
also to plants and animals, because to the degree that they are at all,
they have their worlds, their own specific (broad or narrow) environ-
ments. This ontological determination “being-in-the-world,” if under-
stood within that horizon and applied to existence (the being of
human beings) is, they will say, merely a species of the broader genus
called “to have a world.” It is a short step to understanding things that
way. But on closer view it is clear that whereas we may have to attrib-
ute “having a world” to plants and animals, we can do so only insofar
as we have first understood this structure as it pertains to our own
existence as such.

We can arrive at the biological basis of human being—i.e., the basic
structure of our “biological being” in the narrow sense—only if before-
hand we have already understood “biological being” as a structure of
existence. It does not work in reverse. We cannot derive the determina-
tion “being-in-the-world” from biology. It must be acquired philosophi-
cally. This means that even biology qua biology cannot see the struc-
tures of “biological being” in its specific objects, for qua biology it already
presupposes such structures when it speaks of plants and animals. Biol-
ogy can establish and determine these structures only by transgressing
its own limits and becoming philosophy. And in fact more than once in
the course of the development of modern biology, especially in the
nineteenth century (although only in very general characterizations
and vague concepts), biologists have referred to this structure and to the
fact that animals above all, and plants in a certain sense, have a world.
To my knowledge the first person to have run across these matters again
(Aristotle had already seen them) was the biologist K. E. von Baer,'°
who referred to these structures in his various lectures, but only in
passing, never really thematically. More recently his suggestions have
been taken up by von Uexkiill,’! who now deals with this problem the-

10. [The Prussian-Estonian Karl Ernst von Baer (1792-1876), who, as the
founder of comparative embryology, discovered the mammalian ovum and the
notochord. Heidegger mentions him at SZ, p. 78 / tr. 84.]

11. [Jacob von Uexkiill (1864-1944), best known for his Umwelt und Innenwelt
182 Part II
matically, not in a [216] philosophical sense, however, but in connec-
tion with specific investigations in biology.

I must emphasize that from these references we at first gain very lit-
tle philosophically for being-in-the-world as a structure of existence.
The point now is to understand the meaning of the being of this struc-
ture. The regional horizon for biology and for all of psychology (which
nowadays likes to call itself anthropology) presupposes the philosophi-
cal question about the structure of existence itself. This is a philosophi-
cal question—more precisely, a categorial question—and it cannot be
reached, much less answered, by a psychological or biological inquiry.

These remarks are important for contemporary philosophy, because
we find philosophers (Iam sure you are familiar with this) who try to
attack this Lebensphilosophie and show that the “philosophy of life” (as
it so haplessly calls itself) is biological philosophy. This kind of opposi-
tion to the philosophy of life began with Rickert and from the begin-
ning was based on a misunderstanding. It mistakes the categorial
problematic of philosophy with regard to life for a biological problem-
atic. Rickert is correct insofar as the philosophy of life’s investigations
and conclusions have de facto not pressed forward into categorial struc-
tures, even though directed toward seeing something like that. From
the very title “philosophy of life,” you can see that it does not really
understand what it is about. This title is a tautology, since philosophy
deals with nothing but existence itself. As regards Lebensphilosophie,
the only thing more brilliant than doubting that philosophy is always
about life is to doubt that botany is always about plants. This problem-
atic of existence must be understood from the beginning as a philo-
sophical problematic. So we now ask: [217] On what basis and in what
way does being familiar with the world get determined in its “how,”
namely, as concern?

We begin with a concrete example as we approach this structure of
existence, in which already-being familiar with the world is taken as
concern. Being-with, we said, is in the mode of being essentially as-
signed to the world. It will suffice to point out some things we take for
granted, things that are overlooked but still remain puzzling: e.g., the
fact that I stand, sit, lie somewhere, on something. These seem to be
trivial phenomena, hardly worth philosophy’s attention. But in the
concrete, existence is always essentially assigned in a specific relation
to its lived world.

Let’s take ourselves, right here and now, as an example. We are es-
der Tiere (Berlin: Springer, 1909; 2d exp. edition, 1921), as well as for his Theore-
tische Biologie (Berlin: Paetel, 1920), which was translated by Doris L. Mackinnon
as Theoretical Biology (London: K. Paul, Trench, Trubner / New York: Harcourt,
Brace, 1926).]
§16. The conditions of the possibility of falsehood 183
sentially assigned to a specific lived world with a specific structure—in
this case, a specific space, prepared with specific goals in mind, so that
it is quiet enough and warm enough not to disturb the imparting of
information, which is supposed to happen on my side, and the under-
standing of it, which is supposed to happen on your side. We con-
stantly need and make use of the lived world—but without directing
our attention to it. That, in fact, constitutes its taken-for-granted-ness,
the peculiar kind of being of the lived world. Looking at our existence
even more concretely—say, in terms of the communication that hap-
pens in the lecture—we see that during the lecture there can occur a
comportment such as writing on the chalkboard. Insofar as I am liv-
ing in the lecture, Iam, in my very existence, essentially assigned in a
certain sense to the chalkboard, to the chalk. Let us say that without
paying any particular or explicit attention to it, I peel off the paper
from the chalk so that I can write with it. That is a specific activity that
has a solid connection with my comportment and my existence, but
one does not require any special organization.

This activity is unto something and makes use of it in the lived world
with which I am preoccupied. Activities like this, as well as all more
developed [218] kinds of involvement with things in the lived world, I
characterize as “concernful involvement.” I mean this expression as a
phenomenological-philosophical'? term, which means that I do not use
it in some pre-scientific sense or as applying to an individual science. I
understand it with a philosophical intent. In everyday usage, besorgen
means to attend to something, to carry something through; or in the
form, etwas sich besorgen, to procure or get something for oneself. We also
say: “I am concerned he won't come,” by which we mean, “I fear that he
won't come.” All of these meanings are blended into the philosophical
use of the term, which correspondingly is quite broad on principle and
yet need not be empty.’’ But this breadth does not exclude precision. In
fact it demands it. What, then, is this broad basic sense to which we
must appeal when we say that using the chalk is an act of concern?"

* * *
In the case of the chalkboard and chalk, we can use “concern” in one
of its everyday meanings. In occupying-myself-with the chalkboard, I
procure some chalk for myself. I get it, provide myself with it as im-
mediately suitable for writing. This procuring in the sense of getting-

12. [Moser, p. 458.24.]

13. [Moser (p. 459.13-14) contradicts GA 21 (p. 218.11) on leer, “empty.” I fol-
low Moser here.]

14. [Here (Moser, p. 460) Heidegger ends his lecture of Thursday, 14 January
1926, to be followed by that of Friday, 15 January, which opened with a 1,240-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
184 Part II

for-myself is an act of concern—in fact, it is concern in an original and
fundamental sense of the term. As being unto the world, this concern
has a meaning fundamentally related to existence, a meaning that
determines each of its concretions such as getting, using what has
been gotten, or surrendering what has been gotten. I procure for my-
self some chalk—as something I can write with—for the specific act of
writing. I do this writing in order to emphasize what I am saying, to
facilitate your retention of it, to make it possible for you to write down
what I am saying, to take notes on it. This reinforcement of what is
being said is done in the service of communicating an analysis of phe-
nomena. This communication has the function of letting you come to
see the phenomena I am speaking about, of bringing you face-to-face
with the subject matter. And this is being done so that from these phe-
nomena you might form an understanding of them; and this, in turn,
so that that you might understand the problematic of logic and the es-
sence of truth.

So we have a series of comportments, [219] from a certain way of
using chalk all the way up to understanding the essence of truth, all
of them ordered successively in the unifying form of an um... Zu, an
“in-order-to.” But the “in-order-to” phenomenon comes to light inad-
equately by our pointing out these comportments. This ordering of
comportments is merely a recognition of the comportments them-
selves. In fact, the order of the comportments, as we listed it, would be
wrong if we understood it as the order of their being. That is not at all
the case. In fact, the ontological relations [of these comportments]
come in the exact opposite order.

It is from out of my purpose of acquiring the understanding of truth
and preparing it [for communication to you], and it is in and for this
purpose that my existence arrives at the chalk within this lived world
and that my being unto the world enters into concern for these things
in my lived world.

There is a network of comportments that precedes the activity in
question. In turn, this network of comportments is and lives by in-
tending something. This anticipation is one of the comportments of
my existence in which I live in order to execute the task that has laid
hold of this existence of mine. Living in this network of comport-
ments, I comport myself to this task.

But this task is nothing but a way my very own existence can be.
This is not just any possibility, but one into which my own existence
has been placed as a possibility of itself. This possibility “is” my very
existence—not something that could be met with or found elsewhere,
whether with other people or in the lived world. Existence is this pos-
sibility in such a way that existence comports itself to it as its very own
being. That is, insofar as existence is the way it is, it is concerned for its
§17. Care as the being of existence 185
very own being. And that is its fundamental kind of existence: that in
its being, it is concerned for that very being.

Ultimately (but not exclusively) the network of comportments, ori-
ented to this in-order-to, is directed to this: that existence might be in
the possibility as which it has chosen itself and [220] into which it has
posited itself. In its very being, existence is out unto its own being as
the being with which it is concerned.

We need to understand this determination still more precisely inso-
far as the being of existence can be understood, in its structure, more
completely as being-in-the-world. In other words, to the degree that
we make basic statements about the being of existence, if these state-
ments are to touch on the complete phenomenon, we must keep in
mind the structures we have brought to light heretofore.

§17. Care as the being of existence. Concern-for and

concern-about, authenticity and inauthenticity
As being-in-the-world—i.e., as being familiar with the world—exis-
tence is out unto its ownmost being as what it is concerned about. The
basic kind of being [Sein] of a being which is in such as way that, in its
being, it cares about that very being [Sein]—this kind of being [Sein]
we call care. Care is the basic mode of the being of existence, and as
such it determines every kind of being [Seinsart] that derives from the
ontological structure of existence.

The phenomenon that we characterize by the term “care” is a very
special structure of existence, and everything depends on a correct
philosophical interpretation of it. The crucial point does not consist in
establishing that existence is concerned about its being. The point,
rather, is to interpret this phenomenon in the direction of a primordial
understanding of being.

Clearly Kant had this state of affairs in mind when he said, using
traditional ontological categories: Humans belong to those “things whose
existence is an end in itself.” Or as he once put it: “Existence is an end in
itself.” Or again, [human beings are those] “whose existence has an ab-
solute value in itself.” Kant provides these determinations in §2 of his
Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals,’ and for him they are the basis
and the proper metaphysical (that is, ontological) condition of the pos-
sibility [221] of the fact that there can be a categorical imperative, that
is, one that can be expressed categorically rather than hypothetically, as
do the usual imperatives in an “if... then” proposition. A categorical
imperative is not preceded by a prior condition regarding something

15. [GM, p. 428 / tr. 36-37.]
186 Part II

else, but is an imperative in which the condition categorically embraces
the conditioned and has absolute value. And this being that exists as an
end in itself is human being, that is, every rational being.

With this citation I will show three things: that Kant had this struc-
ture in mind; that he also (as is obvious) expressed this structure in
traditional ontological categories such as “ends”; and that as he estab-
lished and determined human being as an end in itself, he also under-
stood the human being as having absolute value in itself. It is quite clear
that what he is trying to do here is to determine more exactly the ontologi-
cal statement that existence is an end in itself by introducing the notion
of value. This is the clearest proof (unexpressed, obviously) that, to begin
with, the determination “end-in-itself” is insufficient to clarify what is
meant here. On the other hand, the structure that we understand under
the rubric of “care” is oriented from the beginning not simply to charac-
terizing this kind of being [Seinsart], but also to understanding it in its
being [Sein] —something that was not even an issue for Kant.

The question now is how to understand more originally this phe-
nomenon of care, in which all the comportments of existence origi-
nate, especially being unto the world as concern, along with all of its
modes. When I say that the modes of comportment unto the world
(including the modes of concern) spring from care, you must remem-
ber that care, as existence’s kind of being, is co-original with existence
as being in a world. Yet nonetheless we can still say that in a certain
regard [222] one of them originates from the other. In any case we
must reject the misunderstanding that existence first of all is or could
be something that is concerned about its [own] being and then some-
how, as isolated care, occasionally comes unto a world that it is con-
cerned about. The case, rather, is that existence’s entire structure be-
longs to the phenomenon of care because care is what characterizes
existence. So, care is a determination of existence; existence is being-in-
the-world; and care is at the same time a priori concern. Therefore the
possibility of clarifying the phenomena of a priori letting-something-
meet-us or of being a priori familiar with something—and in general
the phenomenon of being concerned-about—depends on how far we
succeed in making care itself accessible.

We have analyzed the network of comportments that (to put it ex-
trinsically) stretches from involvement with the chalk all the way up to
the goal of communicating an understanding. And we analyzed a lec-
ture as communication and as a comportment of my own existence. In
all that, we showed (granted, in a somewhat one-sided fashion) that
existence’s being is at stake in this comportment. But in our analysis we
omitted an essential connection: that at the very same time, although in
a different way, the current existence of those who are listening and
understanding is likewise at stake. One might think that the care of the
§17. Care as the being of existence 187
existence who is communicating is “concerned for” and “deals with”
those who are listening, and that they are always there in the lived
world and hence fall within the circle of its being concerned-about. But
this wrongly interprets the phenomenal state of affairs.

You the listeners are not objects of a concern-about. As a form of
communicating the subject matter and helping people see it in a lec-
ture, care is never being concerned-about, because the lecture cannot
really produce in you the vision of the subject matter but can only
awaken it or arouse it. Therefore, that which care qua communication
wants to communicate cannot, in its most proper essence, be an object
of concern in that care. Instead, another existence, as care, takes it
into its care. Accordingly the kind of being that the communicating
existence has in relation to [223] the listeners is not a being-familiar-
with, and it is not a being concerned-about. Rather it is a being-with, it
is a mutual-care, or better: being concerned-for [Mitsorge, genauer: Fiir-
sorge|. This expression too must be understood as a phenomenological
concept.

Being concerned-for likewise has other possibilities and forms (al-
though this is not the place to go into them). But regarding being-
with-others in the basic comportment of being concerned-for, we have
to make a fundamental distinction.

Concern-for can be carried out in a way that virtually takes away the
other’s care. In concern-for him I put myself in his place: I step in for
him, which entails that he give himself up, step back, and accept ready-
made the concern I show him, thereby completely freeing himself from
his care. In the kind of being concerned-for where care “steps in,” the
person on the receiving end becomes dependent and dominated, even
though the domination may be entirely unspoken and not experienced.
We characterize this first kind of being concerned-for as one that “steps
in” and takes the place of the other—takes away and dominates. By
contrast there is a second kind of being-with-the-other that does not
step into his place (his situation and project) and take it away, but in-
stead carefully steps ahead of him, not so as to take away his care—
which is himself, his very existence—but to give it back to him. Such
concern-for does not dominate but liberates."®

* * *
The second kind of concern-for is the concern-for of authenticity, be-
cause the existence who receives it can and should return to himself and

16. [Here (Moser, p. 476) Heidegger ends his lecture of Friday, 15 January
1926, to be followed by that of Tuesday, 19 January (Heidegger did not lecture on
Monday, 18 January), which opened with a 550-word summary that is omitted in
GA 21.]
188 Part II

become his own authentic self. Here I certainly do not understand the
other existence primarily in terms of the world I’m concerned about.
Rather, I understand the other’s existence only in terms of himself. By
contrast, the first mode of being concerned-for is concerned for the other
in such a way that, in his place and at his service, it procures for him a
possible possession. It understands the other existence in terms of the
things that he is concerned about, which are giving him difficulty. This
concern-for throws the other out of his place, as it were, and engages
only with what must be done [224] to restore the other to a now-
guaranteed possession of that thing. This kind of being concerned-for
treats the other like a nothing, as if he had nothing of existence about
him. In this form of being concerned-for he is not present as his own
existence but as inauthentic existence, as something merely there in the
world, someone who cannot get anywhere with his life.

We have characterized two extreme modes of being concerned-
for—the one authentic, the other inauthentic—because only from out
of these two extremes can we shed some light on those factical concre-
tions that we understand as “mixed forms” (for reasons that are em-
bedded in existence itself and cannot be further explained here).

Existence’s being-with-and-for-each-other, as existential, is an a
priori being-with-and-for-each-other im the world and thus also a mode
of being concerned about the world that is exercised with-and-for-each-
other. The two kinds of such being-concerned-about the world are
ontologically different, depending on the kind of being-concerned-for
that the concern has and on the character of care itself. Likewise the
lived world, or particular things within it, can be objects of concern in
different ways, depending on how each existence relates to the lived
world and is engaged with it and for a specific being concerned-about.
In that case, being-with-each-other is determined simply by how people
deal with the same thing.

The possibilities of for-each-other are confined within certain lim-
its. For example, in being-for-each-other there can be distance and
reserve, not to mention outright mistrust. However, in the opposite
direction, being-with-each-other can also be determined not from the
thing with and for which they are engaged but from each one’s own
existence that is with the other. From that bondedness with the other
there can first arise the authentic issue, i.e., the correct concern about
the same issue. Only from that does “communication” (as we now call
it) arise. So we see a peculiar conjunction between the two phenom-
ena: on the one hand, the being-with-each-other of being concerned-
for, and on the other, being concerned about the world itself. [225]

If we hope to understand the phenomenon of being concerned-
about as the kind of being with which existence is in the world—we
must understand this concept in a sufficiently broad sense. That is, we
§17. Care as the being of existence 189
have to understand it as a structural concept. It is neither created out
of nor limited to specific concrete ways of comportment. Above all it is
not limited to modes of comportment like acquiring or producing
something, or making it available. So it is not limited to those modes
of being concerned-about that we call active comportments in the
narrow sense. Instead, it includes letting something be: letting a field
lie fallow, putting something aside, giving it up, as well as all phenom-
ena we can characterize as “letting go of.” All such comportments are
modes of being concerned-about. When I neglect something, I don’t
do nothing. I do something, but I do it in the mode of “not.” Neglect is
a very determinate concept correlative to being concerned-about, and
possible only in it. There is neglect only where there is care.

The term “concern” must be understood very broadly as the name
of a structure. In explaining this phenomenon I cannot now delve into
the meaning of this structural concept itself or the specific method-
ological problems associated with it. Such a discussion would get us
too involved and take us away from our real subject matter.

By way of summary we can say: Existence’s basic kind of being is to
be concerned for its being, and this basic kind of being is understood
as care. Insofar as existence is essentially being-in-the world, care is
co-originally concern. And insofar as existence is being-with-others,
existence’s basic of being is likewise concern-for. Being concerned-
about and being concerned-for are constitutive of care, and when we
abbreviate and use just the term “care” in our explanations, it must be
properly meant and concretely understood as care that is concerned-
about and concerned-for. “Care” in an emphasized sense means that
concern-about and -for qua care, [226] are concerned for our being as
care. This makes it clear that the basic structure of our existence,
which we abbreviate as “care,” encompasses a multitude of phenom-
ena and that we have not come up a simple phenomenon with a sim-
ple structure on which the rest are built. Rather, just as being-in-the-
world, being-with-others, and being-concerned-for-ourselves are all
constitutive of existence, so too the ontological meaning of these com-
portments are co-original.

Being concerned-about and being concerned-for are co-original pos-
sibilities of existence. Therefore, we say very generally that these same
structures, which indicate a multiplicity, are equally original. That
wards off the notion that one of these structures is derivable from the
other, that one is built upon the other. And in so doing, we certainly
have not said anything about the unity of the multiplicity of concern-
about, being concerned-for, and especially concern-for-oneself. Above
all, nothing has been said about whether there is only one kind of unity
to this multiplicity or whether “unity” is or is not the right name in this
context, for certain possibilities that existence has. With regard to the
190 Part II

question of the unity of these multiple structures, we can say negatively
only that this unity is not a sum in the sense that it comes after the parts
and is only the sum of them. Rather, the unity of this multiplicity is a
wholeness that precedes the multiplicity and is its origin and that, as it
were, first releases parts from that wholeness.

But with all of this we still have not gained much toward an ade-
quate understanding of the issue if the point is to understand this
unity of the multiplicity not just in a formal sense but rather as the
unity of a being that has the character of existence. Clearly we must
understand this unity of existence as a mode of its being. The afore-
mentioned modes of authenticity and inauthenticity become impor-
tant for clarifying this phenomenon of the unity of existence, and
what’s more, they intersect with the modes of genuine and non-genu-
ine. There is a non-genuine authenticity, that is, existence may be a
non-genuine [227] being-with-oneself; and there is a genuine inau-
thenticity, that is, a genuine losing of oneself that grows out of the
concrete existence in question.

The problem of the unity of existence—or more accurately, the
unity of these basic and manifold structures—is understood in the his-
tory of philosophy mostly under the rubric of the ego and the unity of
the ego and of the self—where “ego” is taken primarily in the sense of
the theoretical ego or, as we say, the pole of theoretical acts. This is
very clear in what Kant says: “The ‘I think’ must be able to accompany
all my acts” (Critique of Pure Reason, B 131). This “I think” is what con-
stitutes the general possibility of the unity of consciousness. If we
want to understand this “I think” in a very broad sense, the way Des-
cartes understands the cogito, there is still a secondary meaning ac-
companying the first one (or maybe it is what is properly meant),
namely, that at each moment the manifold of existence’s current com-
portments can be understood by existence as its own unified experi-
ence. I mention this problem of the unity of the multiplicity only in
order to indicate to you that as we continue to make progress in ana-
lyzing existence’s being as care, we naturally should not remain con-
tent with a simple characterization of these manifold structures.

The term “care” itself, as well as the phenomena it includes, funda-
mentally refers to a structural phenomenon. It should never be under-
stood in a pre-scientific sense as expressing an everyday experience of
existence in which one could say that human life is worry and hard-
ship. If it is understood that way, the characterization of existence
would be a specific interpretation of specific experiences. It would be
a specific worldview characterization that could then grow into sys-
tems of worldview interpretations of existence, such as pessimism, for
example. Our interpretation of existence in terms of care has nothing
to do with characterizations of that type. Rather, the basic structure
§17. Care as the being of existence 19]
[that we have worked out] is first and foremost the presupposition for
the fact that perhaps, in large measure, existence [228] may be worry
and hardship in that pre-scientific sense.

As long as existence is, it is always in a specific mode. But that
means that existence is not set, once and for all, in just one specific
mode that would exclude any ability to be otherwise. Properly this
means that whenever existence behaves in a particular way, that way
remains only one possible way of behaving. Existence can, in princi-
ple, give up that first way and enter upon a different way of behaving.
Therefore, “possibility” is a determination that belongs in principle to
the modes of comportment, and this possibility does not disappear
when a particular comportment is de facto chosen and lived out.

In this more detailed interpretation of comportments we also en-
counter difficulties insofar as the concept of possibility has up until now
gone entirely unclarified in scientific philosophy. And to the degree that
it has been clarified, the explanations typically only go as far as possibil-
ity in the modal sense, where it is seen in the context of statements and
of the certitude that can accrue to them. In that case, the idea of possi-
bility is seen in connection with actuality and necessity as determina-
tions of being, i.e., the being of nature in the broadest sense. The mean-
ing of possibility and the kind of structures of possibility that pertain to
existence as such have been entirely closed off to us until the present.
Therefore the explication of existence constantly runs up against diffi-
culties because it refuses from the start to conduct investigations into
the issue by making any use of traditional concepts.

One of the basic possibilities of existence’s being that we have already
mentioned is that of authenticity and inauthenticity. I will go into this
briefly because we will be making use of this distinction later in clarify-
ing the difference between authentic and inauthentic truth. In looking
at the phenomenon of care, we have brought out three [229] structures
of existence: being-in-the-world, being-with-others, and being-con-
cerned-about-oneself. Furthermore, as so characterized, this existence
is essentially always my existence. In ontological statements about this
being that I call existence, the personal pronoun must necessarily be
also mentioned: this being [Seiendes] that has the character of existence
is an “I am” or a “you are.” The way we understand this is that exis-
tence, by its very essence, is always mine, and not in the sense of some
formal generality. Rather, existence is always mine fo be in this way or
that and fo be such and so. Existence is always mine insofar as existence
has a priori decided the way in which it is mine—not that existence itself
has necessarily made the decision, but rather in the sense that “a deci-
sion has already been made” about my existence. “Existence is always
mine” means factically that existence has a self that must be appropri-
ated in one way or in another and to one extent or another. It has a self
192 Part II

that it must grasp and understand as its own to a greater or lesser de-
gree. Orin the deficient mode, it has not yet grasped itself or has already
lost itself. First and foremost, existence has usually not yet achieved it-
self or has not yet found itself (during its youth, for example). Or it has
lost itself, perhaps even at the most vital point of its life. Existence can
have lost itself—and not yet have found itself— only insofar as existence,
in its very being, is mine, i.e., my possible authentic existence. The two
modes of authenticity and inauthenticity are grounded in the fact that
existence as such is mine.

What is more, the inauthenticity of existence does not refer to less
being or an inferior grade of being. Rather, inauthenticity precisely
can indicate existence in its full concretion—its many activities, its
liveliness, its interestedness, its ability to enjoy—in all of which it con-
cretely lives and moves. For the most part—and this is important—
existence comports itself neither in the mode of authenticity nor in
that of simply being lost, but instead in a remarkable indifference.
That, in turn, is not nothing but something [230] positive—the aver-
ageness of existence, which we call “everydayness,” and which is es-
pecially difficult to understand categorially in its structure and in the
meaning of its being. I have said something about this in earlier courses
and will not go into it here.

In this connection, we need to understand that the possibility of in-
authenticity and its dominant role is comprehensible only in terms of
the structure of existence. As we said, existence is being in the world.
When we pointed out this structure we emphasized right off that it
mostly takes the form of familiarity with the world. That is to say, con-
cern loses itself in its world and gets determined primarily in terms of
the world it is involved with. We must remember that this form of con-
cern as familiarity with the world, which we can now characterize as
inauthentic concern about things, is a fundamental way that existence
is. We go into this phenomenon precisely because our a-priori-having
operates chiefly in the arena of statements about the world. Natural,
casual statements that we make fall within such statements about things
we meet in the world, and these statements arise from concern about
and dealings with the world. These statements are the precise focus of
our reflections, or rather the ur-temporality of these statements. To that
end, we said we must first acquire the horizon in which such a com-
portment—a specific statement— operates. Now we have clarified this
horizon, at least in preliminary fashion.

Concern in the form of a concern that is involved in the world is a
specific mode of care itself. The fact that we have given the name “in-
authentic existence” to such involvement in the world does not mean
that existence annihilates itself (so to speak) in its being when it loses
itself. No, it means that existence, insofar as it is a concerned absorp-
§17. Care as the being of existence 193
tion in the world, is—as such and even in its state of being lost—a kind
of being in which existence is concerned for itself. When we speak of
[231] absorption in, or fallenness into, the world, that does not mean
that existence’s kind of being (viz., that its being is to be concerned
about its being) is extinguished. If that were to happen, care would no
longer be care and concern about things would be impossible. Rather,
we understand absorption in the world, in the form of concern and
loss of the self, as meaning that the being of the self is modified in
some way by its absorption, but is still itself in this modification.

The modification is manifest precisely in the fact that, given such
concernful world-absorption, existence understands itself only in and
through such comportment. It knows itself and understands itself but
only as related-to-its-world. Thus the world of my concern and the
things with which I am involved ultimately determine me and my
being. I now understand myself and regulate the possibilities of my
being (whether primarily or in large measure) in terms of those things
and their involvement. Even the extreme forms of this mode of inau-
thenticity still contain the primary structure. In inauthenticity, Iam
concerned about my existence.

Given the way we understand the being of existence, we can say
that existence puts itself into one of the possibilities of its being and
therefore into a specific possibility of concern, and in so doing remains
with its world. Concern and its object are determined structurally in
terms of care itself. We can interpret the most extreme case of manual
engagement with something and show that even in complete self-for-
getfulness, the orientation of care whereby existence is concerned for
itself is still alive therein—except that the existence that is concerned
for itself is now understood almost as a thing, something simply there,
something you meet up with indirectly through whatever you happen
to be working on at the time.

We must remember that inauthenticity is only a modification of the
full structure of care. The concern that goes with inauthenticity we
call [232] “fallen concern.” In inauthentic concern, existence places
itself into one of its determined possibilities of being, and places itself
into its concern about things in such a way that its comportment is
determined in terms of the object of that concern. In its involvement
with the object of its concern, existence remains with that object.
Whatever existence is concerned about and cares for, is where exis-
tence dwells. Those are the things existence has, and existence is con-
cerned with possessing them and increasing that possession. All pro-
duction and acquisition in the broadest sense (including the production
and acquisition of knowledge about things), all of that already pre-
sumes a specific kind of possession, and so the one who already pos-
sesses is able to increase his possession. By contrast, if existence is to
194 Part II

gain itself in its authenticity and not be exclusively or primarily lost in
its world, existence needs to have already lost itself in order to gain
itself—lost itself in the sense that it is always able to give itself over to
worldly production and acquisition.

In Christianity and its interpretation of existence this particular
matrix of being that obtains between existence’s authentic being and
fallen concern has undergone a specific conceptualization. But we
should not understand this structure as if it were specific to a Chris-
tian awareness of existence. Just the reverse. Only because existence
has this structure in itself qua care can there be a specifically Christian
conception of existence. And because of that (although we can’t go
into it here), these structures can be worked out in complete isolation
from any orientation to whatever kind of [theological] dogmatics. You
can see the difference from two things: (1) What is at stake in our de-
terminations is an analysis of structures and categorial determinations.
(2) A concretion of the interpretation of existence need not necessarily
be a Christian one. In fact, any philosophy—which, as philosophy, must
stand outside [233] of faith—not only may not, but absolutely cannot be
a Christian interpretation. On the other hand, we should not forget
that this Christian understanding of existence (which for its part has
changed multiple times in the course of history) is not a monolith at
all, and has itself opened a specific area of existence for philosophical
consideration and inquiry. This problematic pertains not just to the
Middle Ages. All modern philosophy is incomprehensible without the
doctrines of Christian dogmatics. On the other side, the doctrines of
Christian dogmatics are entirely determined, both in conceptuality
and scientific character, by the philosophy of its day.

Let me emphasize: these connections that we can uncover between
care as authentic being and fallen concern, are contained in the very
idea of care as the meaning of the being of existence. The kind of con-
cern in which existence has lost itself in its world arises from the fact
that existence itself, insofar as it is in a world, is essentially referred to
this world in which it is. Existence is factically fallen into its world. Or:
this fallenness into its world belongs to the facticity of existence. By
“facticity” we understand a specific determination of the being of ex-
istence. The term does not have an indifferent meaning that would be
the same as the factuality of something merely there. Nonetheless, it
is, in a specific sense, a factum and we designate this specificity as fac-
ticity and will determine it more precisely later. Being essentially re-
ferred to the world already entails fallenness and fallen concern.

With this we have a determination of the structure of existence
that is adequate for our purposes. We can now see the horizon within
which any statement about the world, as a comportment of existence,
is located. In particular we see what we established by taking our
§18. The ur-temporality of care 195
question in the first direction we took, [234] namely, the a priori let-
ting-the-world-encounter and the tendency to uncover. Now we must
determine the ur-temporality of these phenomena as modes of the
being of existence and thus as comportments that have the ontological
character of care. If ur-temporality is a—or the—basic determination
of being itself, then probably care itself in its whole structure must
have an ur-temporal character. And for their part, the comportments
of the whole will be ur-temporal insofar as they are comportments of
existence, the phenomena of concern and care.'”

* * *

§18. The ur-temporality of care

Our goal is to secure a basic interpretation of the statement in terms
of its ur-temporality. For that we have to clarify the ur-temporality of
care as such. And for that we need we keep in mind the structures we
have acquired up to this point.

We now understand concern about the world (and particularly
fallen concern) as a matter of being already familiar with the world.
We also characterized the care at the heart of concern as the form of
being in which a being is concerned for its being. We need to under-
stand the structure of care as “formally” as possible, not in the sense
of emptying it out and reducing it to a mere relation of something to
something else. We mean, rather, formally indicating a specific struc-
ture of existence. The peculiar thing we have to understand is the
phenomenon that existence is always concerned about something.

We have said what existence is concerned about. We now leave aside
two issues—the viewpoint whence existence grasps the being that it
cares about, and the degree to which we explicitly enact that under-
standing, i.e., actually live in it or even care about it—in order to focus
on our sole topic: the existential structure of being-concerned-about-
one’s-being, or having my being “at stake” for myself.

“Being at stake” entails that what lam concerned about is not a solid
possession. And in fact, the “at stake” belongs to existence as such as
long as existence is. Therefore, [235] the “what is at stake” is never a
solid possession. However, having-something-at-stake means that ex-
istence is precisely a being-unto what is at stake. This being-unto is not
a matter of being with something that is just there, but rather being
with something that, of its ownmost being, is not yet a solid posses-

17. [Here (Moser, p. 492) Heidegger ends his lecture of Tuesday, 19 January
1926, to be followed by that of Thursday, 21 January, which opened with a 1,240-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
196 Part II

sion, and in the final analysis never can be. Care is being-unto, and
what it is unto is the very being of existence, the being that existence
always is not yet but can be. Thus, “at stake” entails a being-out-for
one’s own being as ability-to-be.

This ability is determined not primarily in terms of incidental data,
situations, and the like that sometimes hit existence one way, some-
times another. All of that is existentially possible only because exis-
tence, as care, is constantly its own ability in the form of being-out-for
this ability. The “at stake” entails that existence has been a priori placed
in its ability, in fact, already placed a priori face-to-face with itself.
Care means: existence is ahead of itself. Care, as such, is concern. Care
has the structure of 1. being ahead-of-oneself, along with 2. being a
priori familiar-with-the-world. In a phrase: being a priori ahead of oneself
and familiar with one’s world. With that, we have understood the onto-
logical structure of concernful care.

In the investigation that follows we must limit ourselves to this
issue alone. We intentionally do not treat being with others or care as
concern. We omit them specifically because our chosen subject is only
statements about the world, not statements about other people—even
though (as is to be shown) the other is present in a certain way in
statements about the world. Those other phenomena are essentially
more difficult, and they would presuppose yet other reflections. And
for our preliminary exposition of ur-temporal structures, the phe-
nomena should not be developed in too complicated a fashion.

Let us remember that we are taking the analysis in a somewhat
one-sided direction toward concernful care. But we also note that, as
we have said, we cannot master the phenomena of concern-for and
being-with either by simply broadening and modifying what [236] we
have established about concern or by simply transferring being-unto-
oneself and its structure over to being-unto-others as in that favorite
argument:

1. Being-unto-others is very different from being unto a thing.

2. The other is itself also an existence.

3. In this case, therefore, we have the ontological relation of one exis-
tence to another.

4, But such a relation is already included in one’s own existence, inso-
far as existence as such relates to itself.

5. Therefore, being-unto-another is, so to speak, merely a projection
of the ontological relation of existence to itself.

It is easy to see, however, that in being-unto-oneself, that self is precisely

not someone else. Therefore, being-unto-others is an irreducible, inde-

pendent way of being, one that is co-original in existence along with
§18. The ur-temporality of care 197
being-in and being-unto-oneself. Contrary to the argument above, the
other, the “thou,” is nothing like a second “I” to whom I counterpose
myself. We certainly cannot deny that the possibility of understanding
another is to some degree co-conditioned by how I understand myself or
my existence as such. But such conditionedness of the factical perfor-
mance of understanding another already presupposes (and does not
first create) being-unto-another as unto a thou. In interpreting the phe-
nomenon of being-with as being-unto-another (as we must, in principle),
never forget that we never experience other people as some indetermi-
nate mental “centers,” floating around in an empty “over-against-us.”
We experience each other person as an existence, a being-with, a being-
with-one-another in a world. Even being-with-another lives first of all
from a shared-being [Mitsein] with him in a world. Thus, the other is, in
principle, uncovered for others in his very existence. So it is a mistake to
interpret the other phenomenally as a second ego, and it is absurd to
pose the problem of co-being with others in such a way that one posits
the constructivistic presupposition that first Iam given only to myself—
and then how does this solus ipse manage to reach out to a thou? [237]

Let this suffice to characterize the most obvious problems that go
with the phenomenon of being-with. Insofar as our topic is statements
about the world, other people are not the subject matter of such state-
ments. But on the other hand, recall that we distinguished three
meanings of “statement”:

1. pointing-out,

2. predication,

3. communication.

When a statement is a communication, the full phenomenal content of
the statement about the world does include the other to whom we com-
municate what is said in the statement. That is, the reception and under-
standing of a communication made by the other means the same as that
she shares with me her vision and understanding of, and her way of
being unto, what is being spoken about.'*In a statement that is shared
and communicated in this fashion, two things happen: A thing becomes
uncovered for another person; but more than that, a new shared-being
with that other person in the world is generated. This is what progress in
scientific knowledge means, and not the piling up of more and more
results. But here too we can only allude to these phenomena.

I emphasize these connections that we will not be taking up be-
cause time and again one slips into the mistaken notion that what gets

18. [The es at GA 21, p. 237.12, is a misprint for er—i.e., “der Andere”; cf. Moser,
p. 505.4.]
198 Part II

said about a subject during a lecture course within the appropriate
methodological limits is the only thing that could be said. One can, in
fact, discuss exclusively the fundamental issues, but what is discussed
does not have to include everything. Having defined the limits of our
investigation and excluded the phenomenon of concern-for, we may
return to our topic.

The ontological structure of concernful care is what determines exis-
tence as: a priori ahead-of-oneself-and-familiar-with-one’s-world. Is
there anything in this ontological structure of existence that has to do
with the temporal? And by the way, what is this “temporal,” whose
basic structures we are supposed to investigate? We have already em-
phasized the drawbacks of our chosen path, including the indetermi-
nateness of the phenomenon of time itself, in reference [238] to which
we use terms like “ur-temporality” and “the ur-temporal.” Our lack of a
specific orientation concerns not just any phenomenon, but time. Of
course it is a commonplace to say that time is hard to understand, and
there is no doubt that we lack a clear idea of what we call “time.”

We will get some help by orienting ourselves to the everyday un-
derstanding of time, pursuing and critically discussing what is meant
by “ur-temporal” characteristics, especially with regard to care. The
everyday understanding of time is not wrong or the like. It has its own
legitimacy and even an understandable necessity.!”

* * *
The structure of the everyday understanding of time must be intrinsi-
cally ur-temporal, it must formally have a “relation to time.” To say
that something is temporally determined means that it is “earlier” or
“later” than something else; it comes “before” or “after” something. Or
it has “already” or “not yet” taken place. Moreover, we say something
is “at the same time” as something else, or in another case that it is not
at the same time but “of the same duration.” “Earlier—at the same
time—later” do not simply coincide with “past-present-future,” since
the past itself, as past, can be earlier or later or at the same time, and
the same with the future. And even in the “now” there is a before and
an after, and since they are found in every now, they are therefore
found in every “just now” [Soeben] and “already-has-been,” and like-
wise in every “right away” [Sofort]. Every “just now” is, in the very
next now, a “just a second ago.” The past constantly increases in its
pastness. It becomes intrinsically ever-more past, so that ever-new
nows and just-nows are produced and push the past into already-has-

19. [Here (Moser, p. 507) Heidegger ends his lecture of Thursday, 21 January
1926, to be followed by that of Friday, 22 January, which opened with a 560-word
summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
§18. The ur-temporality of care 199
been-ness. Although the past no longer “is,” it continually becomes
more and more past. The past “is” not simply past. It is not the one
track of time, the one “arm” of time, that is not.

There is a plethora of time-characteristics: earlier, later, before, by
now, already, not yet, at the same time, just now, [239] right way (in
the very next second), now; past, present, future. With them we have
essentially exhausted what can be established about time—I mean:
not as regards the reckoning of time, but as regards the philosophical
interpretation of the interconnection of these characteristics and of
the “propositions about time” that are grounded in these interconnec-
tions, for example: “Different times cannot be at the same time.”

In the course of the history of the problem of time, all the character-
istics have been examined more or less with deep insight and with
surety as regards the methodological focus of the analysis. In the process
the terms were coined that are used for all research into time.

Here we have chiefly named time-characteristics that at first sight are
not congruous, although they are “promiscuously” employed in the
common understanding and imprecise everyday linguistic usage: earlier,
later, before, after, already, not yet. And now we see that two of the char-
acteristics we just named occur in the notion of the structure of concern-
ful care: already-being-with and being-ahead-of-oneself. “Already” is the
opposite of “not yet,” as “before” [vor] is the opposite of “after.”

The question remains whether the aforementioned structure of
care is adequately understood when it is interpreted in the sense of the
characteristics of “already” and “before” that we have just adduced.
The “already” means an “already-having-been,” a “no-longer-now.”
The “before” means a “not-yet-now” in contrast to a “now” or a “no-
longer-now.” Both characteristics refer to a being with reference to the
fact that it is experienced as running its course “in time.” And if some-
thing gets determined by these characteristics, then it is determined in
relation to time.

But what does it mean that something is determined in relation to time
in this fashion? And what is the condition of possibility for something
being determined in this way? To speak of something as determined in
relation to time is to speak of it with regard to its traversing a now.

Something can traverse a now only if it comes into a now, only if
we encounter it in a now. In turn, we can encounter something only
if it can show up— [240] and the only thing that can show up is some-
thing whose kind of being is presence-there. We say that what is pres-
ent-there occurs in the world. So the kind of being that pertains to
what is present-there is precisely this “occurring within the world.”*°

20. Presence-there and occurrence-within-the-world are to be sharply sepa-
rated from being-in gua being in a world. The latter pertains to the very essence of
200 Part II

Why do we understand this coursing along in time as a passing
through a now? Answer: because time—taken as that in relation to
which something is determined as being in time—is and must be un-
derstood in terms of its now. The time “in” which something runs its
course is time experienced as now-time. Insofar as concern must take
time into account and reckon with it and calculate something with
reference to it, time must be understood as now-time. Why is it that
time is first of all experienced as now-time? And why is it that the
time which is experienced in that way is interpreted in the sense that
we've already indicated? These matters must be clarified in terms of
time itself—but this is a task for a later time.

In the present context, the point is simply to see that the character-
istics we have educed are oriented to the now, and not accidentally or
in the sense of an empty possibility. Instead, the now-relation is con-
stitutive of their being. They are what they are on the basis of that
relation. The “not yet” is “not yet now”; the “already” is always an
“already having been by now.” Likewise, “right away” is a “right now,”
and “one second ago” is “one second ago now.”

Say I pursue the “a second ago now” as it sinks into the past. What if
I say that the “a second ago now” is currently “two seconds ago now.” In
that case, the “now” of “a second ago now” is still there in the “two sec-
onds ago now.” It has not been lost. Rather, “a second ago now” keeps its
own now, even when it becomes “two seconds ago now.” Moreover, for
its part, the “second ago” of “a second ago now” is “a second ago” of “a
second ago now” only because of an essential relation to a new [241]
“now.” And the original now of “a second ago now” has already become
its own “second ago” in relation to that new now.

The “at the same time” (the other time-characteristic we mentioned)
is also a now-phenomenon. Things are “at the same time” when they
are “in the same now,” or as we say, “at the same time.” That latter
phrase shows it is not arbitrary that we understand time as now-time,
as time which is oriented in terms of the now.

According to this explanation of time, the fact that something is
time-determined means that it is experienced as present-there now or
is understood as something present-there or not present-there (in the
form of a not-yet or a no-longer). Something that we encounter in this
existence’s kind of being. A stone or a table is present within the world. It is a
thing-of-the-world. It is, but it never is in-a-world in the sense of being in and
being familiar with a world. By contrast a human being is, strictly speaking, never
just present-there within a world. We attain this supposedly “primary” form of
being only when we are dead. In fact, only at that point is a human being some-
thing [that is] just present-there—because then the human being is no longer
“there” [da] in the sense of existence that we have explained.
§18. The ur-temporality of care 201
way is “in” time, or as we also say, it “falls” within time, within such
and such a time. Such-and-such-a-time is determined on the basis of
an enumeration of nows.

Is care time-determined in this sense? Does “already” —taken as the
structural moment of “already-familiar-with” [Schon-bei]—mean the
same as “already having been”? Should we say that being-familiar-with
is essentially the same as being in the now? And wouldn't that mean
(since being-familiar-with and being-in-the-world are modes of exis-
tence’s being) that existence, as being-a/ready-with, is already no more?
The result of that would be: at every now in which existence is, exis-
tence is no more—i.e., is not. Obviously we do not mean anything like
that. Rather, the “already” is precisely a characteristic of existence’s
being. It must determine existence’s being positively. It cannot express
a being-no-longer.

Or does this “already” mean the same as “already beforehand”?
Existence is already beforehand a being-familiar-with—but already
beforehand in relation to what? The determination “already” should
hold with regard to existence itself. But the “already” cannot mean:
“already before itse/f.” It cannot mean that existence was already with
its world before it was at all, because if existence was with its world,
then it already was, and it is impossible for existence to enter into being
“later” than this “already.”

Therefore the “already,” as a moment in the ontological structure of
“already-familiar-with,” does not refer to or determine a being as re-
gards any “having-been-earlier-than” or “having-been-later-than” ei-
ther itself or anyone else. [242]

Correspondingly, the same holds for the “before” [vor] in the phe-
nomenon of “being-ahead-of-oneself” [Sich-vor-weg-sein]. Again, this
characteristic of “before” cannot mean that existence as care is “be-
forehand” in relation to itself, as if it were earlier than it “is,” for exis-
tence precisely is insofar as it is ahead-of-itself.

As time-characteristics, “already” and “before” have nothing to do
with any thing that occurs “in time” (that is, in its now). They do not
refer to any thing that can be determined in this now according to an
“earlier than” or a “later than.” Therefore, although care is determined
by time-characteristics, it is not time-determined in the sense that it
occurs, as a being, “within time.” But that does not mean it is some-
thing outside of or above time. “Extra-temporal” and “supra-tempo-
ral” are only modifications of being-in-time, and they presuppose this
being-in-time as what makes them possible. Therefore, care is not
time-determined in this sense.

But can it be time-determined at all? What would that mean? As
we have explained, care is the being of existence. Therefore, it is not
itself a being, and certainly not a being “present-there.” If “already”
202 Part II

and “before/ahead of” were to have the sense of time-determina-
tions—i.e., if they were to determine the “how” of being-in-time—
then care qua being [Sein] would be a time-determined being [Seien-
des]. But to take being [Sein] as a being [Seiendes] is obviously a
contradiction, and doubly so in the present case insofar as it is truly
contradictory in the first place to take the being of a being (namely,
existence) to be a being [Seiendes] that is totally opposed to existence.
Care not only is not time-determined in the aforementioned sense,
but also absolutely cannot be that. And yet “already” and “before/
ahead of” are time-characteristics! Therefore, the only possibility left
is that their temporal meaning is not the one expounded up to this
point, but a different one. In what sense is it different?

From what we said earlier, insofar as care does not refer to a being, it
is not related to a “now” within which something present-there does
and can occur and through which it acquires a certain temporal deter-
minability. The characteristics “already” and “before/ahead of” are
[243] determinations not of any being at all but of a certain kind of
being. At first it is unclear what it is supposed to mean that “already”
and “before/ahead of” are not time-determinations of a being [Seien-
des], but time-characteristics of a kind of being [Sein]. But then it would
seem that we are back at square one. Nonetheless, even if we have not
acquired anything positive, we have gained something essential in the
form of a “prohibition,” namely, the indication that if “already” and
“before/ahead of” are time-phenomena, the most readily available in-
terpretation of time as now-time is of no help here. Therefore, we must
come up with a different meaning of time (not a different time). In the
process perhaps we will later see why and to what extent it is the case
that time is and must be experienced above all in the sense we have
already discussed.

What path can guide us to this different meaning of time and fi-
nally help us understand the temporal meaning of these characteris-
tics that we designate as “ur-temporalia”? I have already mentioned
that as we walk our chosen path, we are walking and working with-
out foundations. We did not begin by coming up with an original and
proper meaning of time from which we could philosophically deduce
these time-characteristics as such. Quite the contrary, we began with
the readily available understanding of time as “now-time” and have
been using it to grope our way toward the proper meaning of time. We
want to illumine and delineate more sharply the initially obscure
time-characteristics of “already” and “before” in contrast to the com-
mon understanding of them. For that we need to go deeper into the
everyday understanding of time (which is not per se wrong, but has its
own legitimacy and necessity), and we need to determine more pre-
cisely the structures we draw from it. We do so in order to make sure
§19. An original understanding of time 203
that the thread guiding us in clarifying everyday time (and that is to
lead us to original time) is itself securely grounded.*! [244]

* * *

§19. Preparatory considerations toward attaining an
original understanding of time. A return to the history of
the philosophical interpretation of the concept of time
Our goal is an ur-temporal analysis of care. So we began by determining
the time-character of those moments that first push to the fore as time-
determinations in the structure of care, namely, already-familiar-with
in being-ahead-of-oneself. First we drew our attention to the moments
of “already” and “before/ahead of,” and in so doing we remained ori-
ented to characterizing the kind of time that is accessible in the everyday
experience of time. We focused on the common concept of time because
it is the only one that has been theoretically and conceptually worked

out in philosophy heretofore (although only within certain limits).

Characterizing the common concept of time entails understanding
time in terms of the now. The now plays a preeminent role in the com-
mon understanding of time insofar as we determine the other two
time-characteristics—past and future—in relation to it, the past as the
no-longer-now, and the future as the not-yet-now. So the now-relation
is essential for understanding the past and the future.

As regards the understanding of time as now-time, we can deter-
mine something as temporal only insofar as its kind of being is mere
presence, that is, only insofar as we understand the thing as having
that kind of being. Given the very meaning of its being, only a being
that has the character of mere presence has the intrinsic possibility of
passing sequentially through a now.

We also say that a being falls within time, or more exactly that at any
given moment it falls within a now. So we can reverse the proposition.
If something’s time-determination is “falling within a now,” its kind of
being is mere presence. The being of the merely present pertains pri-
marily to the world, that is, to nature. World and nature are not identi-
cal. World is the categorially broader concept, rather than nature being
the broader concept and [245] world a determined section of it. No, na-
ture is the world only insofar as it is uncovered in a determinate way.

With our focus set on the common concept of time, we asked: Do
the moments of care that we first came up with— “already” and “ahead

21. [Here (Moser, p. 520) Heidegger ends his lecture of Friday, 22 January
1926, to be followed by that of Monday, 25 January.]
204 Part II

of”—have the time-characteristics of ordinary time? Our analysis has
shown that this is impossible. The moments of care cannot have the
ordinary sense of “temporal.” If they did, the very structure of care—a
form of being—would have the character of a being, since we have
shown that only the present-there can have the determinations of or-
dinary time. Care is not a being but a way of being, specifically exis-
tence’s way of being, which is the opposite of mere presence and the
merely present. Therefore, there is no way we can understand “ahead
of” and “already” in terms of the ordinary understanding of time and
its characteristics. Hence the need to ask how, if at all, the “already”
and “ahead of” can be understood temporally.

For that to happen, we will have to come up with a more original
(or more cautiously: a different) understanding of time that will allow
us to determine the meaning of these characteristics. The method-
ological path we are following does not have such an understanding
of time at hand. Instead we have to acquire it indirectly and in the
following way: While holding firm to the characteristics of care that
we have already gained, we propose the hypothesis that their time-
characteristics have a different sense, so we orient ourselves in a more
precise way to the usual concept of time and its structures. In high-
lighting those characteristics, we will soon arrive at a broader under-
standing of ur-time. Only then can we understand how, within the
original understanding of time, ur-temporality is possible.

We want to highlight the initially unclear time-characteristics of
“already” and “ahead of” as determinations of care in contrast to the
ordinary concept of time. The more securely and concretely we under-
stand the ordinary concept of time, the more confident will be our
progress. [246] To that end, let us direct ourselves very briefly to the
history of the development of the concept (and thus the interpreta-
tion) of time heretofore. Naturally, in doing so, we do not need to
come up with an extended history of the concept of time. Instead, we
will pause only at certain points in that history where the explanation
of the concept of time took on a certain fundamental, ontological sig-
nificance. We do so with the intention of thereby showing that right
up to our own day the philosophical interpretation of time has in fact
been oriented to the ordinary understanding of time; we will prove
the thesis that right up to today, time has always been understood as
now-time.

Some philosophers, in the course of expounding the phenomenon
of time, especially recently, have made a distinction between objective
and subjective time, or between transcendent and immanent time.
This distinction says nothing, however, because it could well be that
even the so-called “immanent” time, the time of lived experience,
merely carries over into itself the characteristics of the so-called tran-
§19. An original understanding of time 205
scendent or objective time. We will see that this distinction between
immanent/subjective and transcendent/objective time remains caught
up in the understanding of time as now-time. If the now is the proper
being of time, it would be consistent to say that to a certain degree
time, taken as a whole (i.e., the unity of present, past, and future), has
within itself an imbalanced kind of reality. There is the properly real,
i.e., the present. In turn every now has (as Lotze puts it) two unequal
arms of non-being stretching out in both directions: one into the past
and the other into the future. But the two arms are different: the non-
being of the past is the no-longer, and the non-being of the future
[247] is the not-yet.

Lotze’s image characterizes very clearly the way the real accent of
temporal being falls on the now, the now-present. In our everyday
experience of time we understand it as something we use for reckon-
ing in our concern for the world, something we can use to compute
the events we encounter in the world. In this way, concernful being-
in-the-world places “time” within its “calculating.” In so doing, every-
day experience understands nothing more about what all this means,
and it requires no further understanding as long as it manages to put
time at its own disposal for purposes of calculation. In this sense, these
events in the world fall “within time.”

The theoretical study of events in the world purely as incidents of
movement qua change of place is one example of an independent, deter-
minately oriented elaboration of calculative concern and time-reckoning.
Movement is understood this way. Such a theoretical-calculative study
of the world consists in uncovering and determining ature. In prin-
ciple, natural science embraces the foundation and horizon of all con-
cern about the world. In determining the pure processes of nature, it
uses time for its calculations, in basically the same way that pre-scientific
experience does when it focuses on and takes account of things in the
world as regards, e.g., the basic events of the change of day and night.
For the investigation of nature—i.e., physics—time is inserted into the
basic formula by which physics determines its objects: s = c- t [spatium =
celeritas - tempus]. That is, the distance covered by something in motion
is equal to its velocity multiplied by the number of now-points the
movement runs through as long as it persists. Here as well, the processes
fall “within time” in the sense that we explained.

Now if the idea of nature is not limited to material processes but
includes all processes of things present, whether they be physical or
mental, then in this sense mental processes as well as physical ones
fall within time. Aristotle already understood explicitly this business
of the “in time” taken in this broader sense. Later [248] Kant gave
particular emphasis to the fact that the data of inner (and not just
outer) sense—in fact, the data of outer and inner sense—determined
206 Part II
time. There is no question that this is very obscure, and Kant gave
only a rough exposition of the connection.

Let us give the name “world-time” to the time in which worldly
data and natural processes (in the narrow sense) fall. Here we under-
stand “world” in the philosophical sense: the “wherein” of existence’s
being. At this juncture we cannot go into a proper explanation of the
concept and structure of “world.” We are still completely in the dark
about what this world-time basically is and how we are to understand
it. All we know is that this time, understood as now-time, is the time
wherein we encounter whatever is present.

A philosophical reflection does not fall out of the sky, nor is it an ar-
bitrarily concocted undertaking. Like all knowledge it grows out of our
factical existence and its everydayness. To the degree philosophical re-
flection tries to direct itself to time, it will let itself be given time in the
form in which neutral world-experience knows time. That is to say,
when philosophical knowledge stands in connection with science, it
will understand time in the same way the phenomenon is already given
in science. But on the other hand we also have to say: Jfa philosophical
discussion of time has its place in the context of a philosophical reflec-
tion on nature; and if we treat time primarily within this context (in a
controlling, perhaps even exclusive way), then philosophy will under-
stand time basically as world-time. The same holds if the explanation of
time gets connected with the question about the possibility of a scien-
tific knowledge of nature, as is the case with Kant. The same goes if the
context of the philosophical discussion of time is even more encompass-
ing than that of an investigation focused specifically on nature; an ex-
ample of this is the question about the origin of the world, or even its
creation, as in Augustine and Neo-Platonism, where [249] eternity is
posited over against the world understood as all beings within time.

The systematic location of the investigation of the phenomenon of
time within a given philosophy is the index of the basic conception
that guides the endeavor. Wherever time is seen in connection with
world, nature, or created beings, it is understood as now-time, and
“temporal” means: occurring and running its course “within time.”

This concept of time has dominated all philosophical reflection
about time ever since Aristotle first came up with it and presented it
in his Physics A 10-14 with a conceptual power that has never been
equaled since. From Aristotle to Hegel, and even more so in the period
of post-Hegelian philosophy, this concept of time has remained the
guiding thread for the question of time. Why? Basically because the
time that is understood in this way is the very kind of time that pri-
marily and persistently imposes itself upon our everyday experience.

Bergson’s recent, independent investigation of time is no exception
to the rule. It appears to attain to some new insights, and it seems that
§19. An original understanding of time 207
Bergson wants to overcome the traditional concept and press forward
to a more original concept of time. But on closer examination we see
that Bergson falls into the very concept of time that he is trying to
overcome—even though (and we should clearly emphasize this) Berg-
son is guided by a correct instinct.

Bergson’s goal is to work out the difference between time and dura-
tion. Duration, however, for Bergson is nothing but lived time, and
this lived time, in turn, is merely object-time or world-time, insofar as
it is considered in the way it shows up in consciousness. A clear indica-
tion that Bergson failed to break through to a conception and catego-
rial knowledge of ur-time is the fact that he understood even lived
time—duration—as (in French) “succession,” with the sole proviso that
the succession of lived time is, he says, not a quantitative succession laid
out in individual now-points. Instead, this succession is a [250] qualita-
tive one, in which the individual moments of time—past, present, and
future—permeate each other. With that he has reached the limit, for
he does not say what quantity or quality is; he provides no principled
discussion of these two guiding threads, but simply presupposes them
as already known. Moreover, he describes qualitative time—dura-
tion—merely in images, with not a word about working out any kind
of concept. The essential point, therefore, is that Bergson certainly
does try to get to authentic time by way of the phenomenon of dura-
tion, but he understands duration once again in terms of succession.

Only because today we still do not yet understand the proper sense
of world-time can we come to believe that Bergson has understood time
in a more original way. That he failed to do so is shown by the fact that
he misunderstands the time which he defines as time in its proper sense
and which he distinguishes from duration. He fails to understand time
in its own sense, and instead identifies it with space. In this regard, we
must say that even though it is not completely obvious, Bergson con-
ducts his analysis of time in constant opposition to Aristotle’s concept of
time. In his early years Bergson made extensive studies of Aristotle, and
in 1889, the same year his first investigation on time and duration ap-
peared, he published a small treatise, his dissertation, On the Concept of
Place in Aristotle. Place and time are treated by Aristotle in the same
book. And it is quite clear how Bergson arrived at his concept of dura-
tion in opposition to quantitative time, namely, by misunderstanding
Aristotle’s definition of time as AQuOUOc KtvrjoEWws<, i.e., as the number—
or better, the what-gets-numbered—of movement.

In his later writings Bergson has not changed the exposition of time
given in his early work. On the contrary, he has maintained it up to
the present day. The essential and enduring element of his philosophi-
cal work does not lie [251] in this direction at all. Rather, the things of
value, for which we are grateful, are found in his text Matiére et Mé-
208 Part II

moire.** It is a basic text for modern biology, and it contains insights
that are far from exhausted yet. Today it is Scheler, above all, who is
strongly influenced by it. Let this stand as a preface to our historical
orientation. Since current opinion takes it as obvious that Bergson has
discovered a new concept of time, we should discuss it critically and at
length.

We will now take up a historical approach to the concept of time
with the intention of concretely appropriating the temporal character-
istics of time as the tradition experienced them.”’ At the same time we
will demonstrate the predominance of a specific interpretation of time.
We proceed to a further explanation of the historical development of
the understanding of time and to an exposition of the concept of time,
going backwards in history. Our investigation is intentionally oriented
to a similar investigation that we have already conducted, namely, into
the history of the concept of intuition.”4 There is an inner connection
between the phenomenon of intuition, the predominance of the truth
of intuition, and the specific form of the dominant understanding of
time, viz., as now-time. We begin our treatment, which aims at getting
a better grip on the ordinary understanding of time, with an analysis of
time in Hegel.

§20. Hegel’s interpretation of time in the Encyclopaedia’
Hegel treats time thematically in his Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical
Sciences, part I, The Philosophy of Nature.”®

22. [Henri Bergson, Matiére et mémoire. Essai sur la relation du corps a l’esprit
(Paris: F. Alcan, 1896); translated by Nancy Margaret Paul and W. Scott Palmer as
Matter and Memory (New York: Zone Books, 1988).]

23. [Here the Moser transcript (p. 531) clarifies GA 21 (p. 251).]

24. [Heidegger may be referring to his course of Summer Semester 1920, “Phan-
omenologie der Anschauung und des Ausdrucks,” which has been published as GA
59, Phanomenologie der Anschauung und des Ausdrucks. Theorie der philosophischen Begriffs-
bildung, ed. Claudius Strube (Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klosterman, 1993).]

25. [Heidegger was to make use of this section of the lecture-course in writing
§82 of Being and Time; ct. SZ, pp. 566ff. / tr. 481ff.]

26. [The edition that Heidegger uses is Hegel, Encyklopddie der philosophischen
Wissenschaften im Grundrisse (1830), ed. Gerardus J. P. J. Bolland (Leiden: A. H.
Adriani, 1906), which contains the Zusdtze (Addenda). A newer edition, also with
the Zusdtze, is Encyklopddie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse (1830),
ed. Eva Moldenhauer and Karl Markus Michel (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp,
1970). See also Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature, ed. and trans. M. J. Petry (London:
George Allen & Unwin / New York: Humanities Press, 1970), with Zusdtze; and
§20. Hegel’s interpretation of time 209
Section One: Mechanics
A. Space and Time

[1. Space in general. §§254-256]

2. Time in general. §§257-260
This thematic context allows for no misunderstanding: time is con-
nected with space, but not the way it is in Kant and in the tradition of
the philosophy of nature generally, ever since [252] Aristotle—namely,
as “space and also time.” Rather, Hegel’s explanation tries to show
something more—that space becomes time:

The truth of space is time, so that space becomes time; it is not we who,

subjectively as it were, make the transition to time; rather, space itself

makes the transition {into time}. In the usual representation {by which

Hegel means: In the naive view}, space and time are quite separate: space

is there, and then we also have time. Philosophy fights against this “also.”

(§257, Addendum)?’

By that last sentence Hegel means: philosophy sublates the difference.
In the naive view of common sense, space and time are different,
whereas for absolute thinking no such distinction may hold: Space
becomes time. When thought in an absolute fashion, space “is” time.
Bergson has expressed the opposite thesis, not “Space is time” but
“Time is space.” Both theses are untenable; but both are on the scent
of a phenomenal connection between space and time. Basically both
are referring to the same thing but without understanding what they
mean by their diametrically opposed propositions. And both Bergson
and Hegel destroy what there is of authentic content in their theses, by
sublating it not with a solid, sure truth but by a fundamental sophistry
that Hegel’s dialectic lives off.

We now go into this thesis a bit further in order to clarify how time
is experienced and understood in Hegel, namely, as the time of nows.—
“Space becomes time.” That means: When it is thought in an absolute
philosophical way, space “becomes” —i.e., comes into “being” and thus
“is”—time. What does “is” mean here? Does it mean the same as in the
sentence “The chalk is a book”? In that case “is” means: “The chalk
has the whatness (and the thereness) of a book.” They are both the-
very-same.

Let us ignore for a moment the basic inadequacy of explaining a
categorial relation (e.g., between space and time) in terms of a relation
between concrete things (chalk, book). Let’s use the example simply
Hegel's Philosophy of Nature, trans. A. V. Miller (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970),
without Zusdtze. | use and amend both translations. |

27. [Heidegger’s glosses are recorded in Moser, p. 532.9-11.]
210 Part II

to clarify what Hegel means by “is” when he says “Space is time.” He
does not, in fact, mean that they are the-very-same, even though, in
his Romantic fashion, he lets this meaning mix with his own. Yes,
“space is time” —but Hegel would [253] resist someone saying, “Every-
thing spatial is temporal,” or even, “There is no such thing as space;
rather, everything is only time.” Naturally that is not what “is” means
in the sentence, “Space is time.”

The “is” in the thesis “Space is time” means that space has the being
of time or that the being of space is determined by time—in fact, is de-
terminable only by time. This is something Hegel does not understand,
and yet he must somehow have it in mind if his thesis is to have any
meaning at all. Space gets its way of being determined—i.e., the fact of
its being-thought-absolutely—only from time. But something’s having-
been-thought-absolutely is that thing’s truth. And the being of some-
thing is thought in the truth of that thing.’ That is why Hegel says: “The
truth of space {i.e., its being-thought absolutely: its being} is time.” How
can we understand that more precisely with regard to the phenomenon
of space? Although we can’t go into a long discussion of how Hegel de-
termines the concept of space, we will discuss it just enough to let us
understand phenomenally how and why Hegel can say “Space becomes
time.””°

* * *
According to Hegel, space is the “unmediated indifference of nature’s
being-outside-itself” (§254).*° By way of clarification we can say that
space is the abstract multiplicity of points that could be differentiated.
Space itself is not broken up by these points, but neither does space first
arise from them or put itself together out of them—because the points
themselves are already space. And so, even though space is determined
by these points which can be differentiated and which themselves are
space, space itself remains without [any internal] differentiation. The
differences themselves are of the same character as what they differenti-

28.[“Und in der Wahrheit ist das Sein von etwas gedacht” (GA 21, p.
253.11-12).]

29. [Here (Moser, p. 534) Heidegger ends his lecture of Monday, 25 January
1926, to be followed by that of Tuesday, 26 January, which opened with a 480-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]

30. [Heidegger’s words, both at GA 21, p. 253.20-21, and at Moser, p. 536.29-
30, are: “Die ‘vermittlungslose Gleichgiltigkeit des AufSersichseins der Natur’
(§254).” That is a somewhat free citation of Hegel’s: “Die erste oder unmittelbare
Bestimmung der Natur ist die abstrakte Allgemeinheit ihres Aufersichseins,—dessen
vermittlungslose Gleichgitiltigkeit, der Raum.” In English: “The first or unmediated
determination of nature is the abstract universality of nature’s being-outside-
itself—the unmediated indifference of that being-outside-itself—namely, space.” ]
§20. Hegel’s interpretation of time 211
ate. Nonetheless, insofar as any point differentiates anything at all in
space, that point is the negation of space, although in such a way that
this negation itself remains in space (a point is, after all, space).*! Thus
the point does not raise itself up out of space as if it were something dif-
ferent from space. To put it in Kant’s terms, points are merely limitations
of space, as are all other spatial phenomena and all space that is deter-
mined, i.e., delimited by points, lines, or planes. [254] Space is the non-
differentiated outside-each-other of a multiplicity of points. But space
itself is not a point; rather, as Hegel says pregnantly, space is Punktualitdt,
“punctiformity” (§254, Addendum). This is the basis for the principle by
which Hegel thinks space in its truth, which is to say: as time.

The negativity which relates itself, as a point, to space and which unfolds

its determinations, as line and plane, within space is, however, while in

that sphere of outside-itself, also and equally a for-itself; Negativity posits its
determinations in it fi.e., in the sphere of the for-itse/f} but, at the same
time, posits them as in the sphere of being-outside-itself, thereby appear-
ing as indifferent vis-a-vis the immobile juxtaposition [which is space]. As
thus posited for itself, it (namely, this negativity, the point} is time. (§257

Paragraph)”

Thus, the negativity of the point—which we explained earlier and
which in a word is “punctiformity,” i.e., space—is, when posited for
itself, time.”

Our interpretation will now be directed less at Hegel’s formulation
than at making accessible the phenomena that are intended therein.
The points along with the lines and planes that a point can become are
determinations of space that delimit space and thus can constitute a
specific space. These determinations or delimitations of a given space
are themselves space. But understood “logically” in the sense of He-
gel’s logic, this means that these determinations and differences, these
limits of space, insofar as they themselves are spatial and are space,
simply remain in space. Such limits and differences are what they are
by being different-from-something-else, i.e., by negation. A point, qua
negation, has an indifferent subsistence in space: it arises in space and
does not escape it. This indifference of its subsistence qua negation is
precisely what characterizes space.

31. [Moser (p. 537.14-15), with “so, daf§ diese Negation (Punkt ist ja Raum) im
Raum selbst bleibt,” corrects GA 21 (p. 253.30-31), which has “so, dafS diese Ne-
gation im Raum (Punkt ist ja Raum) im Raum selbst bleibt.” The Moser text is also
closer to Being and Time; see SZ, p. 567.1-2.]

32. [Heidegger’s glosses are found at Moser, p. 538.2-7.]

33. [By “punctiformity” Hegel means the “dot-quality” (Edith Wyschogrod) of
something, whence derive lines and planes.]
212 Part II

When we experience or represent space, we represent its limits in
their indifferent subsistence, and thus immediately represent the ne-
gation. If space is represented in this way, space certainly appears and
shows itself, but we do not understand it in its being. [255] Something
is understood in its being only in thought. Only when space is under-
stood in its being—i.e., only when it is thought—is the truth of space
attained. But a thing is thought, in Hegel’s sense of “thought,” not
when it is immediately represented, i.e., not when the determinations
of the thing to be understood simply subsist (are merely there) —in the
present case, not when the point, the negation, subsists in indifference.
Thinking is determining, and determining (determinatio) means negatio
[negation]. The point (punctiformity, negation) ought not be simply
represented. It itself must be thought, determined, i.e., negated. The
negation of the negative is the thought-ness of space, i.e., its being. If
negation is determined or negated, then it is sublated beyond its mere
simple subsistence. Then the point is no longer in its state of indiffer-
ent, unsublated subsistence. Rather, when it itself is posited for itself,
it comes forth, specifically in such a way that it posits for itself a new
being-outside-itself. As the posited, it is no longer this and not yet that.
Insofar as it intends itself qua being-outside-itself, it determines the
one-after-another-ness within which it itself always stands (as péoov
[the middle], to use Aristotle’s word), but in so doing, it is indifferent
to the immobile one-next-to-another. It asserts and extends itself; it is
exclusively “now” and no other thing. In its being-for-itself it does
posit the one-next-to-another but in such a way that it is indifferent to
it and is exclusively “now.” It has stripped off its mere simple subsis-
tence and has been sublated to a higher level of determinateness, i.e.,
a higher level of being. The negation of the simple subsistence of the
point, the sublatedness of punctiformity qua indifference, is no-longer-
remaining-inert in the “paralyzed” immobility of space. It is the
changing determination of every single point—“now here, now here,
now here,” and so on. This constant negating of the negation is time.

Hegel does not spell this out; but if his explanation is to have any
sense at all that we can express, it can mean nothing else but this con-
stant negation of the negation. That is, positing the points is in and of
itself a matter of letting each single point be encounterable; and such
letting-something-be encounterable is in each instance a matter of
“now here, now there”—i.e., letting something encounter us [256] in
a now. In every point, a now. The point has its determinateness, its
being, in the now. The point is a now-point. And so Hegel says: “The
point thus has its actuality in time” (§257, Addendum). And again:
“The truth of space is time” (ibid.). That is, the pure thought-ness—the
being—of space is time. The point is the now. Hegel determines the
being of the point as that in and through which the point qua point is
§20. Hegel’s interpretation of time 213
encounterable. In general, in all his categorial explanations, Hegel
does not understand the being of something simply in terms of its
thought-ness. Rather, he makes this being-thought be the equal of
being. Because the pure thinking of the punctiformity of space thinks
the now (i.e., time), for that reason space “is” time.

Through this interpretation we suddenly see that Hegel here under-
stands time as now-time. Only on the un-understood basis of this un-
understood presupposition does Hegel’s explanation of time in terms of
punctiformity in §256 make any sense. Time qua negation of the nega-
tion (the latter gua point) is not just any self-sublation. It is the self-
sublation of punctiformity. Time, conceived in terms of space, is self-
sublating punctiformity. More exactly, time is what is always necessarily
co-posited—as the now—in the sublation of punctiformity. Exactly why
the now is co-posited, and why it is co-posited in this way, are questions
to which Hegel does not and cannot provide any further information.

Hegel determines the being of space as time. Therefore we might
ask, “Doesn't being get determined here quite unambiguously in terms
of time? Isn’t Hegel operating clearly within the problematic of time-
as-horizon?” It might seem so, but he is light-years away from those
issues. We first have to remember: Hegel determines space not in terms
of time but as time. It’s true: he does determine one form of being in
relation to time, but only the being of space. And he determines the
being of space not in terms of time but as time.

By way of summary we can say:

1. Even with the one and only being that he does determine in rela-
tion to time, Hegel does not understand the ur-temporal function of
time, but rather [257] misinterprets time (in keeping with his
method) by making it into the being of space itself.

2. In principle Hegel does not see the function of time for interpreting
being. If he did, he would have had to introduce time already into
his discussion of being in general. But we find no trace of that in
Hegel—in fact, quite the opposite.

3. Hegel is unable to understand the ur-temporal function of time be-
cause he conceives of time in the traditional-dogmatic way as now-
time.

4. That he conceives of time in this way is documented by the fact that
he puts time together with space. But space is the ordo eorum quae
sunt simul (Leibniz),** “the ordering of things that are there at the
same time” — of things that are present at the same time (i.e., in each
34. [Cf. “I have demonstrated, that space is nothing else but an order of the

existence of things, observed as existing together; and therefore the fiction of a

material universe, moving forward in an empty space cannot be admitted.” The
214 Part II

now), simultaneously. Hegel puts time together with space in such a

way that he even removes the “and” between space and time.

But we have still have not finished our investigation of Hegel’s ex-
planation of time. We now want to understand positively how Hegel
understood his concept of time. As regards ur-time there is nothing
we should expect from Hegel, and nothing we can learn from him.
That notwithstanding, his interpretation of the time of everyday ex-
perience can indeed help bring us closer to the forms of time-determi-
nateness of everyday experiential time. I begin with some further ex-
plicit evidence of his understanding of time as now-time: “The now
has a monstrous privilege—it is nothing but the individual now. And
yet, as soon as I pronounce it, this self-vaunting exclusivity unravels,
dissolves, disperses” (§258, Addendum). Therefore, what has being is
the now. The now-moment alone is. The now is the “concrete unity” of
“the abstract moments” of past and future. (§259, Remark).

Furthermore, in nature, where time is the now, there occur no subsistent dif-

ferences between these dimensions {namely, past and future}. (§259)

{The present moment, as now, is} the immediate disappearance of these
differences {being as passing over into nothing; nothing as passing over
into being} into individuality {the now}. (ibid.)

If one considers time positively, one can say: Only the present moment is.
The before [258] and the after are not. But the concrete present is the result
of the past, and it is pregnant with the future. The true present is therefore
eternity. (§259, Addendum)

{Eternity is equal to the} absolute present. (§258, Addendum)

Eternity neither will be nor was, but instead it is. (ibid.)

From this experience of the phenomenon of time we now can also
understand the way Hegel understands the concept of time: “The con-
cept of time {is} becoming” (§259, Addendum).

Recall that what appears within the priority of the present moment
is the now. To a certain degree we are used to this conception of time:
we grew up with it. But this priority is not understood right away. Time
is in the now and as the now, only in order to disappear in it again. But
this disappearance of the now is precisely the being of time. Because
time properly is the now, this now-being [Jetzt-Sein] must be taken up
in this concept. According to its concept, time is “intuited becoming”
(§258 Paragraph), where “intuited” means experienced in its individu-
ality, and this individuality is the now. This concept makes it clear that
Leibniz- Clarke Correspondence, ed. H. G. Alexander (Manchester: Manchester Uni-
versity Press, 1956), Leibniz’s fifth letter, par. 29.]
§20. Hegel’s interpretation of time 215
time itself, understood as intuited becoming, is something-present
which, as now, is there as disappearing.” As being there now, time is
exclusive of everything else, where “everything else” means, more pre-
cisely, all other points. This present excluding—or as Hegel says, “this
existent abstracting” (ibid.) —is not such an excluding “in general” but
rather in relation to space. Hegel understands becoming, which makes
up the concept of time, as disappearing, as the “abstraction of using up”
(§258, Addendum): the pure letting-disappear which itself disappears.

Why, within this becoming which he understands as time, does
Hegel emphasize passing-away, even though he holds that coming-to-
be belongs just as originally to becoming? In fact he says that time is
coming-to-be and passing-away (§258, Addendum). And yet in that
same context he again equates temporality with the past and takes
becoming as disappearing. Hegel cannot explain why time qua be-
coming is now more disappearing and passing-away than it is coming-
to-be [259]—he cannot say why he understands it this way. When
Hegel puts the emphasis on passing-away in his determination of time
as becoming, he does so not on the basis of any philosophical justifica-
tion of this explanation. Rather, he follows the ordinary understand-
ing, quite naively and yet with good reason. In the ordinary under-
standing of time, we say “Time passes” but never “Time comes-to-be,”
even though the latter could be said formally and with equal legiti-
macy, especially according to Hegel. Moreover, no earlier theories of
time have clarified (nor can they) even on their own grounds, why, if
time is becoming, it has to be strictly disappearance. Already in Aris-
totle’s explanation of it, time was assigned to passing-away and not to
coming-to-be. Why that is so remains obscure.

Now we ask very briefly about Hegel’s determination of time as in-
tuited becoming and how time, understood in this way, relates to the
things themselves and, on the other hand, to subjective conscious-
ness. In posing the question in this way, we remain within the tradi-
tional conception of time. According to Hegel (§258, Addendum) time
itself is the process of things. Because things are finite—i.e., not deter-
mined by total negativity—they are temporal. The converse does not
hold: things are not finite because they are in time. “Things them-
selves are temporal,” and thus “the process of... things themselves
makes up time” (ibid.). On the other hand, Hegel says that time is
“abstract subjectivity” (§258). So on the one hand, time is the things
themselves; but at the same time, time is abstract subjectivity, pure
being-in-itself. In all of this one must bear in mind that when Hegel
thinks of the formal self-differentiation of one thing from another,
such that in the difference something is related to its own self, he of

35. [Here Moser (p. 549.1-4) clarifies GA 21 (p. 258.19-20).]
216 Part II

course understands such self-differentiating as subject and subjectiv-

ity. That is, he introduces into the difference of one thing from an-

other an idea that can’t be found there. Then, on the basis of this
sleight of hand, he can say: As a point that posits itself for itself, time
is also abstract [260] subjectivity. So, time is the things themselves,
time is pure self-consciousness, and time is neither of the two. There-
fore, here too, in this concrete example of his explanation of time, we
once again have the same surprising fact: Hegel can say everything
about every single thing. And there are people who discover profound
meaning in such confusion.*®

* * *

What characterizes the ordinary understanding of time is its concep-

tion of time as now-time. In the last lecture, our interpretation made

that clear as regards Hegel. In the course of that lecture we brought
out a variety of different characterizations of time which Hegel, for his
part, would not consider to be different. Instead, he would simply trot
them out for us as “dialectically” one and the same—with the possible
exception of the one he admittedly mentions only en passant, namely,
that time is a passing-away. We don’t need Hegel’s dialectic to show
that time is properly only passing-away. That is bound up with a topic
we shall investigate later.

Let us now recall and characterize the remaining determinations:

1. Time is the negativity of punctiformity, the self-negation of the now-
point, or equally the now’s being-for-itself in the self-externality of
succession.

2. Time is intuited becoming, i.e., it is becoming that is always under-
stood in its individuality. “Understood in its individuality” means
the same as the now that is immediately seen as present-there. The
now is the being of the not-yet, and as such, at the same time it is
likewise the no-longer of its being—it is the transition from nothing
to being, and from being to nothing, which is exactly what Hegel
means by “becoming.” Insofar as this becoming is always concen-
trated in the now, it is intuited becoming.

3. The now is the negation of the negation-qua-punctiformity, and as
this negation of the negation, it is a self-exclusion that at the same
time is for itself [ftir sich seiendes]. Hegel now understands the for-
mal structure of a thing’s self-differentiation as a reflexive relation
to itself, a self-differentiation that can be said of anything at all,
regardless of what kind. Hegel understands this self-differentiating
36. [Here (Moser, p. 546) Heidegger ends his lecture of Tuesday, 26 January

1926, to be followed by that of Thursday, 28 January. |
§20. Hegel’s interpretation of time 217
and being-for-itself as subjectivity. [261] And therefore Hegel can
say—brilliantly, but without any real basis—that to the degree that
time is the negation of the negation, it is abstract subjectivity, pure
for-itself-ness in being-outside-itself.

4. Time is the being of space, and consequently, as the being of the
spatial, it is for Hegel the very process of things themselves.

5. Time qua now-time is the truth of space. The phenomenal content
and legitimacy that underlies this thesis can be clarified by way of
Kant’s and Leibniz’s conceptions of time and their explanations
thereof. To anticipate: That Hegel can say (without understanding
its proper sense) that the truth of space is time, is grounded in the
ur-temporal structure as simultaneity and in the fact that puncti-
formity as space in general must be characterized by simultaneity.
“Simultaneity” means that every point is co-present [mitanwesend]
with every other point in every now.

When it comes to taking a critical stance on all this, we must re-
member two things. (We prescind here from our emphasis on the fun-
damental limits of Hegel’s conception of time, namely, that he knows
time only as now-time.)

1. Time is characterized as intuited becoming only thanks to the for-
mal and empty schema of being —nothing—becoming, a schema whose
many dubious characteristics we cannot discuss in the present
context.

2. From within Hegel’s own position, it is incomprehensible why time,
as he says, is a “using up.” The ordinary experience of time lives off
this phenomenon directly. However, it necessarily remains a puzzle
within the horizon of Hegelian dialectic.

It is clear that Hegel’s interpretation of time is bound up exclusively
with the now, the now-present, insofar as it is precisely the now-pres-
ent that properly and exclusively is. This is clear from the fact that
Hegel quite consistently dismisses the past and future as non-being.
But since they must be something, he says: “They are necessarily only
in subjective representation, in memory and in fear or hope” (§259, Re-
mark). It is characteristic [262] of Hegel that he refers to this merely in
passing and as something of no real importance (cf. “subjective repre-
sentation”), and then moves on. It is also characteristic that he desig-
nates memory, fear, and hope as subjective representations.

Lining up the past with memory and the future with hope is a deter-
mination already familiar to the everyday experience of time. It is a
determination that Aristotle (from whom Hegel obviously got it) had
already grasped theoretically, although only (and typically so) as a form
218 Part II
of naive consciousness, without in any way seeing the inner relation of
time to hope, fear, and the like. Aristotle says:

TOV HEV TLAQOVTOS aidOnotc, ToU dé UEAAOVTOS éATtic. TOV dé YEevoUEVOU

uvryvn. (De memoria et reminiscencia, 449b27 ff.)

Perception {Hegel would say “representation”} is related to the present,

hope to the future, remembrance to the past.
In the same context, Aristotle says:

etn av Kat EttoTH EN Tic EATLOTUKT], KAOATEQ TIVés act THY HavtuKCTy.

(ibid., 449b11 ff)

There may also be some kind of science related to hope, which some call

divining or prophesy.
‘EAmtic, hope, which is coordinated with the future, is also connected
by Hegel with fear. We find this connection as well in Aristotle’s Rhe-
torica (B, 12), where he treats éArtic in connection with ofBoc [fear]
and éAeoc.*” "EAgog does not mean “pity,” which is the way one usu-
ally translates it and thereby misunderstands the whole theory of the
tragic in Aristotle. Rather, €Aeoc means “being in dread for” [Bangesein
um] —in this case, someone else.** It has nothing to do with pity in our
sense of that term. [263]

§21. The influence of Aristotle on
Hegel’s and Bergson’s interpretation of time

Before going on to a brief characterization of Bergson’s thesis—which
corresponds materially with Hegel’s, even though it is set against it—I
will make a brief aside. This morning one of my old students called my
attention to Hegel’s explanation of time in his Jena Logic. The Jena Logic is
a manuscript that was published only a few years ago (just before the
war, and for the first time).*” Hegel prepared it for the purpose of his
Privatdozent lectures in Jena. It is a first step toward what would be-

37. [GA 21, p. 262.23 and Moser, p. 550.13 (which indicates that the oversight is
Heidegger’s own) incorrectly have “Rhetorica II, 2” (which treats of ogy1, anger)
instead of I, 12 (1389a21-22), where Aristotle writes: €Amtic tov LeAAovtdc eoTty,
1] O€ LVN TOU TAQOLXOLEVOV. The topic of ddBoc is treated in Rhetorica I, 5, and
€Xgoc in IL, 8. PdBoc and éAeoc are treated together in Poetica 14 (1453b1 ff.).]

38. [The text Heidegger apparently has in mind is éAgovow éyyv¢ avtoic tou
detvov Ovtos at Rhetorica II, 8 (1386a23-24).]

39. [G. W. F. Hegel, Hegels erstes System, ed. Hans Ehrenberg and Herbert Link
§21. The influence of Aristotle 219
come The Science of Logic. (A new edition of the Jena Logic, edited by Las-
son, has been published in the Philosophische Bibliothek series in 1923.
The earlier edition was textually inadequate.)*° This Jena fragment con-
tains not only a logic but also a general ontology and parts of the phi-
losophy of nature, but it does not have the philosophy of spirit. What I
am telling you about the history of the concept of time has quite a long
past as regards its formulation, so I'll have to be brief and restrained in
explaining the concept of time that slipped me earlier. But even a quick
run-through shows it to be richly informative in many ways.

Allow me to mention something that may not interest you much but
that is important to me insofar as it completely substantiates the inter-
pretation I have been presenting. In these fragments Hegel gives an ex-
tended explanation of the phenomenon of time (“extended” in the sense
that he describes the dialectical steps thoroughly, since he is not yet
caught within the real straightjacket of his system, or does not give to
the presentation the compressed form it has in the Encyclopaedia). Right
from the start let us note the context within which Hegel explains time:
it is in the philosophy of nature, the first part of which is titled, “The
Solar System.” In connection with his clarification of the phenomenon
of ether [264] (today we would say “matter” in the broadest sense),
Hegel first explains the concept of movement, and here the trajectory of
his investigation goes from time to space—the reverse of the Encyclopae-
dia, even though the content is the same in both.

The explanation of time is dialectically more concrete. The dialectic
is complete and thorough: there is more here than in The Science of
Logic. On the other hand, Hegel’s explanation does not yet possess the
elaborate structure of his own dialectic itself; that is, he still lacks the
proper theoretical concepts of dialectical synthesis: being, nothing,
and becoming. He simply works—quite securely, to be sure—within
this dialectic. “Therefore in fact there is neither present nor future but
only this relation of each to the other” (p. 203). Later on he will call
this relation of each to the other “becoming,” which is to say that
becoming is precisely a relation. I emphasize that he still lacks those
distinctive dialectical concepts, and I must say: this lack works to the
advantage of his explanation.

A brief delineation of the content may suffice. On the page just
cited, Hegel says: The now (which, I repeat, is the proper phenomenon
(Helberg: Helberg Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1915). The text was published in
the winter of 1915.]

40. [G. W. F. Hegel, Wissenschaft der Logik, ed. Georg Lasson (Leipzig: Meiner,
1923); this work was also published as vols. 3-4 of Hegel’s Samtliche Werke, and
vols. 56-57 of the series, Der philosophische Bibliothek. See also The Jena System,
1804-5: Logic and Metaphysics, ed. and trans. John W. Burbidge and George di Gio-
vanni (Montreal and London: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1986).]
220 Part II

of time) cannot resist the future. The current now will be overcome by
the not-yet-now, the future as ever pressing upon it. Here too we can
see that Hegel, entirely consistent and consonant with the natural un-
derstanding of time, sees time and becoming as running from the fu-
ture through the present into the past, i.e., as a “passing”: a future that
passes into the past. So the now, as a now, is a not-yet-now (the fu-
ture) that has become the present now. In this sense the present now
is the future. Hegel even says so explicitly: “The future is the essence
[Wesen] of the present” (ibid.). Here he understands Wesen in the Greek
sense—as that-from-which-arises every now as now, viz., from out of
its not-yet-now. I intentionally emphasize this thesis of Hegel—that
the essence of the present is the future—because in a lecture I pre-
sented in the summer of 1924,41I emphasized not that the future is the
essence of the present but [265] that the future is the meaning of tem-
porality. But the meaning of the thesis I hold is diametrically opposed
to what Hegel says here. We will come back to that later. What is clear
is that Hegel understands time as coming from out of the future,
through the present now, into the past. For Hegel, the past is real time,
“time that has turned back into itself” (p. 204). But because every
former or past moment is always a former now, time in a certain sense
constantly runs back into the present, and, as Hegel says, is thus an
endless “circular movement” (ibid.). As regards the reality of time,
here again it becomes clear that the proper accent is on the past. This
is a matter that I cannot explain now because it is much too difficult:
in a very particular sense, the idea of the now-present “exceeds itself”
[uibersteigert|. That is, for Hegel the present now is not simply the pres-
ent now. It also is the now-present of the past. With this thesis Hegel
is as far from the proper sense of time as it is possible to get.

Even on a first reading of Hegel’s exposition, it takes only a superfi-
cial knowledge of Aristotle’s philosophy to see the obvious: What un-
derlies this outline of a system and this particular piece of it is nothing
less than a direct paraphrase of Aristotle’s treatise on time, and this is
something quite important. But you should not misunderstand me
when I say this. I do not mean to say that Hegel is dependent [on Aris-
totle]. Quite the contrary, it is devoutly to be wished that our philoso-
phy today were even more dependent on Greek philosophy than it is—
not by simply appropriating it but by positively understanding the issues.
Here again it is clear that Aristotle has helped out not only Hegel but
many philosophers before Hegel and even more of them after. I say this
now only as regards Hegel’s treatise on time, but I take it that, in its es-

41. [“The Concept of Time,” trans. Theodore Kisiel, in Theodore Kisiel and
Thomas Sheehan, eds., Becoming Heidegger: On the Trail of His Early Occasional Writings,
1910-1927 (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 2007), pages 200-213.]
§21. The influence of Aristotle 221
sentials, his entire philosophy of nature is simply a paraphrase of Aris-
totle in a dialectical mode. During this period Hegel was engaged in a
deep study of Aristotle. But we lack a compass [266] for this terrain and
have no clues about Hegel’s concrete, historical relation to Aristotle.

[Hegel’s treatment of time] may be a paraphrase of Aristotle, but it
is nonetheless one that operates within the self-assuredness of Hegel’s
dialectics. It kills off the proper content of the Aristotelian interpreta-
tion [of time] and preserves instead certain formal, empty results. The

following are some merely extrinsic examples that come to light at a

first reading of the text.”

1. Hegel understands the now—Aristotle’s vvv—in the first instance
as a limit; Aristotle says: OgiCetv, 6g0c—“to limit, a limit.” Hegel
takes the vvv as a point; Aristotle says ottyun, point.

2. Hegel determines the now as the absolute “this”; Aristotle says tod¢
TL.

3. Hegel understands time as a circular movement; in the last book of
the Physics, Aristotle connects time with the odatiga, the circular
movement of the heavens.

The only difference is that Hegel simply identifies and mixes up the

aforementioned determinations—limit, point, absolute this—whereas

Aristotle’s labors properly consist in showing the founding connec-

tions between this-here, point, limit, and now. To put it in Aristotle’s

terms, he tries to show how these determinations, in themselves and
according to their structure, follow (adkoAovOetv) from one another.

Instead of all the mindless drivel that gets written about German

Idealism these days, what we really need is for someone to carry though
a real investigation of this factual connection of Hegelian and Greek
philosophy, along with evidence of where they diverge. That way the
history of philosophy might have some relevance. It’s also clear from
what we said that Hegel’s thesis—viz., that space is time, or as he puts it
in this preliminary analysis, that time is space—as well as Bergson’s
thesis (that time is space) both go back directly to Aristotle.

I already emphasized that Bergson carries out his treatise on time in
strict connection with his close study of Aristotle. He writes in his Essay,

Le temps, entendu au sens d’un milieu ou l'on distingue et ou l'on compte, n’est que

de l’espace.

Time, understood as a field [267] in which we make distinctions and

count, is nothing else but space.*’

42. [Regarding the following, cf. GA 2, p. 570 n. 14. / tr. 500 n. xxx.]

43. Henri Bergson, Essai sur les données immédiates de la conscience (Paris: Félix
222 Part II

This thesis is possible only on the condition that time is understood
from the outset as now-time, on the basis of a particular context,
namely, the constitution of space in simultaneity. Time is not space,
any more than space is time. But time is simply the possibility wherein
the being of space can be determined existentially-temporally—but
not because the being of time is space, but because being in general, as
the being of every being, must be conceived of in terms of time. Or at
any rate, according to the state of our present philosophical possibili-
ties, being can be singularly understood in terms of time. I do not
want to be so entirely dogmatic as to say that being can be understand
only in terms of time. It may well be that tomorrow someone will dis-
cover a new possibility. That is why we can never say that space or
nature or any other being is time. Strictly speaking, we cannot even
say “Being is time,” but only that “The being of this being bespeaks
time.” Or more exactly still: “The human understanding of beings—
and I emphasize human—is possible from out of time.” I stress “human”
because in philosophy we really must stop confusing ourselves with
the good God—unlike Hegel, for whom that confusion is a principle.

But as I said, Bergson does not limit himself to this thesis. Rather,
confronted with this concept of time, which he identifies with space,
he tries to make us understand that ur-time is duration—ur-time,
which he also calls “real time” or “real duration.” Of course we get
very little philosophical information out of him on this, because he
says nothing about the meaning of “reality,” and tells us nothing about
the ontological nature of the life or consciousness wherein he finds
real or lived time.

According to Bergson, time is space and quantitative succession,
and it is distinguished from duration, which is qualitative succession.
The very phenomenon of time (now-time) is shifted from the category
of quantity to that of quality. Bergson [268] thinks he has located the
metaphysical essence of time (therefore, authentic time) in duration,
and so he takes time in its usual sense to be space. But in so doing he
shows that he has not understood time. If he had, he would have had
Alcan, 1889), p. 69. [Heidegger’s manuscript and Moser (p. 556.1) correctly refer-
ence page 69, whereas GA 21 (p. 267.3), employing a later edition, cites it as page
68. The passage cited here can also be found in Henri Bergson, Guvres, Edition du
centenaire (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France: 1959, 1970), p. 62.1-3. (The
marginal pagination of this edition follows the 1939-1941 editions of Bergson’s
works, the last to be published before the author’s death on 3 January 1941.) See
also Henri Bergson, Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of Conscious-
ness, trans. F. L. Pogson (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1910; repr. New York:
Humanities, 1950), p. 91: “. . . time, understood in the sense of a medium in
which we make distinctions and count, is nothing but space.” Heidegger trans-
lates Bergson’s milieu with the German Feld.]
§21. The influence of Aristotle 223
to find a way of showing that the kind of time he takes to be space is
not space at all, but is precisely time—however, only a specific tempo-
ral mode of time.

Bergson’s path for arriving at his thesis that time is space is different
from Hegel’s, but in principle he coincides with Hegel. Bergson’s path
is grounded on an inadequate analysis and interpretation of Aristotle’s
definition of time as aQLOMOc Ktvyoews: that which is counted in
movement. Characteristically, Bergson prefaces his analysis of time
with an analysis of number, that is to say, he orients his entire inves-
tigation to Aristotle. But Bergson himself understands number in
terms of space. He says that “toute idée claire du nombre implique une vi-
sion dans l’espace,” that is, “every clear idea of number implies an intu-
ition of space” (ibid., p. 60;*4 cf. also pp. 64, 172).*? We could say: The
units of numbers and the numbers themselves are distinguished on
the basis of their presence in space. What exactly gets numbered or
counted within movement? Movement is change of place. What gets
counted within movement is the number of points that the movement
has run through. They are what get counted, and they are the only
things that can be the countable. However, in an act of counting, a
now that is counted in this way—a now of time—could not sustain
itself so as to make it connect with another now, i.e., so as to be taken
collectively, along with that other now, without remaining simultane-
ous with that other now. That is why Bergson says it becomes space
(ibid., p. 60).*° Now we can see the inner connection with Hegel’s the-
sis. To be sure, the only way to attain a proper understanding of this
common foundation is to analyze the ur-temporal structure of mea-
suring: the structure of the discovery of nature in general, within
which measuring has a constitutive function. [269]

What Hegel carried out regarding space, Kant had already under-
stood in a more principled and concrete way. Kant did so with explicit
attention to the basic categories of nature in general. Kant sees the
function of time more concretely (1) because he has a freer position on
the things themselves and allows questions to arise from those things,

44. [EDL p. 60 / tr. 79. Heidegger translates idée as Vorstellung (“representation”
or “presentation” ), and une vision dans l’espace as eine Anschauung des Raumes (“an
intuition of space”). I translate Heidegger’s German translation of the French. The
published English edition translates the French as “every clear idea of number
implies a visual image in space.” ]

45. [The Bergson sentence that Heidegger alludes to on page 64 could be,
“lV’espace est matiére avec laquelle l’esprit construit le nombre” (EDI, p. 64) = “space
is, accordingly, the material with which the mind builds up number” (tr. 84). The
text that Heidegger references as “page 172” could be “et on ne mesure que de
l’espace” (EDI, p. 175) = “the only thing we are able to measure is space” (tr. 230).]

46. [EDI, p. 18 / tr. 79.]
224 Part II

and (2) in keeping with the inner freedom of his own way of philoso-
phizing, which admits that there are still difficulties for human phi-
losophizing and that at every moment philosophy faces the possibility
of being up-ended. For Hegel, on the other hand, everything is clear,
and he himself is in possession of absolute truth.*”

* * *
§22. A preliminary look at the meaning of time in
Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason

We have already alluded to Kant’s philosophical position on time
when we first characterized the problematic of ur-temporality. That is
because in a certain sense Kant is the one who made the most progress
in this problematic despite all the limits within which the time-prob-
lematic remains even in him. Even for Kant time is the time of nature,
taking “nature” in the broad sense that includes both physical and
mental nature. But we should consider the following. When we say
that mental nature—the mental succession of ideas in the broadest
sense—is determined by time, an essential exception must be made,
one that determines Kant’s entire problematic, namely that the proper
determination of subjectivity in fact falls outside time, subjectivity as
the “I think” that must be able to accompany all my ideas if the mental
is to be at alla unitary context. [The exception is] that the “I think” or
the transcendental apperception—the very unity of consciousness—
falls outside time. From the beginning and throughout, we must keep
in mind that the concept of time is oriented to nature [270] in the
broadest sense. It is oriented to nature also in the sense that in his
doctrine of the antinomies Kant explains the problem of the possible
origination of the world, the question of the creation of the world, in
connection with the problem of time.

It is typical of Kant that whenever he reaches a crucial problem-set
in his Critique of Pure Reason, he is forced to go back to the issue of time.
Time occupies a privileged place right from the start. Kant does not
think, as Hegel did, that there is just space, and also time. Rather, time
has a principled priority in the problematic of the Critique of Pure
Reason.

To make the point in a merely extrinsic way: Time is treated for the
first time in the Transcendental Aesthetic. But it is treated yet again in
the Transcendental Logic—in fact, in both parts of the Transcendental

47. [Here (Moser, p. 558) Heidegger ends his lecture of Thursday, 28 January
1926, to be followed by that of Friday, 29 January, which opened with a brief 100-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
§22. A preliminary look at Kant 225

Logic, the Analytic as well as the Dialectic. In the Analytic it is treated
under the rubric of the analogies of experience, and in the dialectic,
under the rubric of the antinomies. In the Analytic it is treated in an
even more particular way within the question of the schematism. But
the schematism is what links together the two fundamental parts of the
Analytic, namely the Analytic of Concepts and the Analytic of Princi-
ples; and so the schematism belongs to both parts. Everywhere we
look—the Transcendental Aesthetic, the Analytic of Concepts, the Ana-
lytic of Principles, the Dialectic—we encounter the problem of time. So
even from this quick run-through it is already clear that time plays an
exceptional role in the context of the whole. And within these various
areas of the philosophical explanation of time within the Critique of Pure
Reason, time undergoes different determinations, which of course co-
here among themselves. We cannot say that as of now anyone has
achieved a real interpretation drawn not just from Kant’s words and
sentences but from an understanding of the issue, an interpretation that
would bring to light, and above all demonstrate the intrinsic necessity
of, this inner connection between the problematic of the Critique and
the problem of time. This task is identical with [271] getting a real un-
derstanding of the unitary problematic of the Critique of Pure Reason.

This problem of the unity of the problematic of the Critique of Pure
Reason is precisely what has occupied the attention of the Marburg
School in particular. At a philosophical level, the Marburg School has
far surpassed all contemporary interpretations of Kant in the one-sid-
edness and violence of the way they have proceeded. Cohen took tran-
scendental apperception as the real center of Kant’s problematic, and
tried to interpret the entire Critique from there, from the Transcendental
Analytic and specifically from the demonstration of the origin of the
categories and principles; i.e., he tried to put the Transcendental Aes-
thetic aside as a domain that could stand on its own. In other words, in
as much as time is determined as pure intuition in the Transcendental
Aesthetic, Cohen tried to determine it in terms of logic, as a concept of
the understanding. He carried this out systematically in the first volume
of his system, Logik der reinen Erkenntnis (1902).*8 Cf. also Natorp, Die
logischen Grundlagen der exakten Wissenschaften (1910).*° The principle be-
hind the Marburg Kant-interpretation is to dissolve this twofoldness of
sensibility and understanding (or of being-given and being-thought)
into being-thought [Gedachtwerden] as pure thinking—i.e., to dissolve it

48.[Hermann Cohen (1842-1918), Logik der reinen Erkenntnis (The Logic of
Pure Knowledge) (Berlin: B. Cassirer, 1922).]

49. [Paul Natorp (1854-1924), Die logischen Grundlagen der exakten Wissenschaften
(The Logical Foundations of the Exact Sciences) (Leipzig: Teubner, 1910; 2d edi-
tion, 1921).]
226 Part II

into the [Transcendental] Logic. Cohen attempted to comprehend the
origin of all constitutive determinations of knowledge in general as
rooted in the transcendental apperception. Therefore, this interpreta-
tion of the Critique of Pure Reason is designated as a logic of the origin. I
have already mentioned the consequences this has for the understand-
ing of time within the problematic of the Critique. Here time can no
longer be a form of intuition or a pure intuition, as Kant interpreted it.
Instead, it must be understood as a category.

On the other hand, very little is gained by trying to show that, con-
trary to this notion, such a deduction of time from pure thinking can-
not be carried out and that it is thus impossible to dissolve the Tran-
scendental Aesthetic into the Logic. [272] The problem of the unity of
intuition and thinking remains unsolved even today and perhaps has
never been posed as a real problem at all. Only an unrelenting inves-
tigation into time in terms of its temporality, will put us in a position
to clarify that what Kant understood as the transcendental appercep-
tion and placed outside of time is the basic determination of temporal-
ity itself. Only from that position can we show that the Transcenden-
tal Aesthetic is not an accidental add-on and not (as the Marburg
School thought) an unassimilated leftover in Kant’s work. Instead, we
can show the full-fledged necessity of the determination of time as a
form of intuition. From that position, we can restore to the Transcen-
dental Aesthetic its rights in such a way that we can bring out the
unity of the problematic of the Critique of Pure Reason without doing
violence to the work. In the present context I cannot present this
broader interpretation. Instead I will limit myself simply to laying out
for you Kant’s delineation of time according to the various directions
his questioning takes in the Critique.

§23. The interpretation of time in the
Transcendental Analytic
Kant’s best-known characterization of time (and the only one that is
usually cited) is the one in the Transcendental Aesthetic, where time
(like space) is determined as a form of intuition or as a pure intuition.
These concepts have created great difficulties for understanding Kant,
and in fact still do today, so long as we merely hold on to the verbal
concepts and especially the formal opposition of form and content.
This is especially clear in the problem of space. Of course everyone
says that when space is defined as a form, we should not understand it
as a container into which content is then poured. [273] But this nega-
tive definition does not get us very far in understanding what is meant
here in a simply formalistic way by “form.” We need to see the internal
§23. Time in the Transcendental Analytic 227
structures of the context that Kant himself had in view but did not
analyze. If we want to understand this definition of time as a form of
intuition, the first thing we have to do is to clarify what “intuition”
and “form” mean here.

a) An explanation of the notions “form” and “intuition”

As with “concept,” the primary character of an intuition is presentation.
A presentation, taken as a presenting [of something], means being di-
rected to and having an object. Intuition and concept are the two modes
of presenting that Kant recognizes. Intuition, as a particular kind of pre-
senting, is characterized by the fact that intuition is related immediately
to an object and that, in such being-related, the object is immediately
given. In the kind of presenting called “intuition,” the object has the
possibility of being immediately given, and nothing more. The senses
are the ways such giving-of-something occurs. Each sense has its field of
givenness and provides a manifold from within that field.

Each sense (and Kant does not analyze this further) has its own
distinct field. Colors can never be heard, sounds can never be seen.
But colors and sounds each have their own determinate mode of ac-
cess. And for its part, each sense’s field of givenness embraces a dis-
tinct manifold of what can be given perceptually within that field.
There is a manifold of colors, of sounds, of smells, and so on. Whatever
can be given within the field of a sense must be investigated according
to its relevant a priori structure. Kant (like all philosophy up to now)
omitted that investigation. Husserl in his early Gottingen lectures was
the first [274] to carry out such a specifically phenomenological inves-
tigation. He did so usually under the rubric of an Asthesiologie der Sinne
or theory of sense-perception, an elaboration of the relevant structure
of color in general, of sound in general, and so forth—as the precondi-
tion for anything like a scientific psychology in the sense of research
into actual data. Kant did not examine this area in any detailed fash-
ion. He simply took it for granted in its rough contours, and within
certain limits it was sufficient for his purposes.

Kant saw that the manifold of each sense’s field of givenness has
the determinate character of “one-after-another” or of “at-the-same-
time.” This applies to each particular sense and to sense in general.
Insofar as it is a manifold, whether in the general or specific sense, it
has the character of manifold-ness. To put it more generally and yet
more specifically, Kant saw that the manifold of every field of sense
has the determinate character of one-after-another or of at-the-same-
time.*° It does not matter whether the self-giving manifold of a sense’s

50. [More literally: “Kant has seen that the manifold of such a field of given-
ness, whether of one sense or of sense in general, insofar as it is a manifold, is
228 Part II

field is explicitly ordered in its one-after-another-ness and shows up as
delineated, differentiated, determined, ordered numerically; or whether
it shows up as undelineated, undifferentiated, undetermined, and un-
ordered. To begin with, it is phenomenally irrelevant whether the
manifold is ordered and shows up in a specific order. Whether ordered
or not, it is still a manifold. Whenever something encounters the
senses, the encountering thing gua encountering is always presented
on the grounds of a prior view of what lets a manifold meet the senses
as a manifold.*! A pre-view of a manifold as such is the precondition
for anything being able to be given as a manifold.

What Kant saw was this: letting a manifold encounter the senses
entails (as we now interpret it more precisely in phenomenology) a
pre-viewing of something on the basis of which we can speak of an
order or a lack of order at all. That pre-viewed something is the basis-
on-which anything given [275] is articulated as ordered or unordered.
“Unordered” does not mean a complete absence of order. It merely
means the privation of an order, such that the unordered could be or-
dered. This means that even though unordered, it is still a manifold
and thus already understood via a pre-view of a manifold. But that
means that pre-viewing a manifold as such is constitutive of letting a
manifold encounter the senses. This manifold-ness in terms of which
characterized by the character of manifold-ness, whether in general or in specific
terms—Kant has seen that the manifold of every field of the senses is determined
by the character of one-after-another or at-the-same-time.” ]

51. [(1) Hinblick. In normal German usage the noun Hinblick is used in the
phrase in or im Hinblick auf: “in view of,” or “with regard to.” In the present lec-
tures, however, Heidegger often uses der Hinblick, without the preposition, as the
name for an antecedent pre-view (pre-understanding) of the basis-on-which a
manifold is ordered. He argues, for example, that without an antecedent Hinblick
of what circularity is, one could not recognize something as circular. When it is
used in this sense, I translate Hinblick as “pre-view” (i.e., pre-understanding) and
Hinblickname as the act of taking or having a pre-view, hence as “pre-viewing.”

[(2) Worauf. As a relative adverb, worauf (as in das, worauf) can mean “[that] on
which or to which” and, when the referent is an entire clause, “whereupon.” Hei-
degger often turns the word into a noun, as in the phrase, “das Worauf eines Hin-
blicks.” In that case, it formally means “the object of a pre-view,” i.e., that toward
which a pre-view is directed, that which a pre-view pre-views. However, the spe-
cific content of that pre-viewed object is the principle in terms of which or the basis on
which something is put in order. For example, the principle “redhead-or-not” might
be the principle for sorting out a group of people. When das Worauf is used in the
formal sense (das Worauf eines Hinblick) 1 translate it as “the object of a pre-view.”
When the context, as is often the case, requires a focus on its specific content (the
principle governing an order), I translate it as “the basis-on-which” (something is
ordered) —which is awkward, but surely better than “the principle-in-terms-of-
which of a pre-view.”]
§23. Time in the Transcendental Analytic 229
any manifold becomes intelligible, need not be comprehended the-
matically. The point is this: One-after-another-ness is the pure one-
after-another. It is the basis for my understanding a one-after-another
thing in its one-after-another-ness. However, it need not be themati-
cally intuited and comprehended in the process.”

The essential thing in all this is that, prescinding from orderedness
or unorderedness, order necessarily presupposes a pre-view of some-
thing that gives sense to an order qua order. The difficulty in under-
standing all this comes from the brevity with which Kant lays these
things out, and above all in the ambiguity in his use of the notion of
order. In German the word Ordnung [“order”] really means the same
as Ordnen [“putting in order, ordering”]. When we say, “So-and-so is
concerned with the Ordnung of his papers,” it can mean that he is en-
gaged in ordering them: he is actually putting them in order. But the
sentence can also mean that he is preoccupied with the order of his
papers. In that case he is looking for a principle, the basis-on-which
that he must pre-view if he is to put the papers in a specific order. This
pre-viewed basis-on-which is constitutive of any “order” as such. As
regards any manifold that encounters the senses, it is one-after-another
as such, pure succession—that is to say: time.

What, then, does Kant mean when he says that time is a “form of
intuition”? Nothing other than: time is [276] the unthematically and
antecedently (i.e., pure) presented basis on which a manifold is able to
meet the senses. This is the phenomenological content of all talk about
form in contrast to matter. Those terms mean nothing as long as they
are used loosely, vaguely, and without a focus on the real issues they
refer to—or rather, they mean “everything” insofar as every single
thing can be differentiated in terms of matter and form.

Kant designates time, like space, as not just a form of intuition but as
pure intuition. As with my earlier explanation of the notion of intu-
ition, here too we see that this pure intuition is not an intuition of the
same type as the intellectus archetypus. This intuitus is not originarius but
derivativus, because it does not have the intuited so immediately as to
create the intuited in the very act of intuiting it. Instead, it must first let
the intuited be given to it (only in that way does it have its intuited), but
given purely—i.e., prior to and independent of the understanding re-
ceiving any determination. When we say “prior to” such determina-
tions, we mean that pure intuition is not founded on, not composed of

52. [More literally: “The characteristic is precisely that, in letting a manifold
one-after-another encounter the senses, one-after-another as such—i.e., the pure
one-after-another on the basis of which I understand at all a one-after-another-
entity in the one-after-another—this pure one-after-another need not itself be
comprehended and thematically intuited in the process.” ]
230 Part II

empirical intuitions, of which it would be the generalization. Rather—
and again, this is the essential issue; it is what Kant saw—pure intuition
entails that a pure manifold as such is given immediately without need
of a synthesis on the part of the understanding. On the shoals of these
phenomenal facts, the interpretation of the Critique of Pure Reason that
the Marburg School tried to carry out breaks apart and sinks.

Nonetheless, this characterization of space and time as pure intu-
itions has a very obscure element that cannot be clarified on Kantian
grounds. To put it very broadly: Someone who is [philosophically] un-
sophisticated might say he cannot think anything using space and time
as pure intuitions. And in fact you cannot think anything using those
pure intuitions, you cannot even show something phenomenally. All
one can do is show how Kant got to this notion by way of a specific
dogma. For example, Kant designates time as urspriingliche Vorstellung,
an “original presentation” (B 48) [277]. He understands a presentation
[Vorstellung] as an act of presenting, an act of having something. But in
terms of the phenomenal facts of the matter, what he really means is
that time is what is originally presented. In his use of the notion of pre-
sentation, Kant wavers between what he has seen (“phenomenologi-
cally,” as we would put it today) and what he is unable see because of a
certain dogma. In Kant, Vorstellung—“presentation”—means Vorstellen,
“the presenting of something.” But in his demonstration, Kant saw that
the one-after-another is something that is always already co-presented
prior to the presenting of something. In the Transcendental Aesthetic,
Kant himself speaks of space and time as that “within which” (B 34)
sensations are ordered. But even in Kant this “within-which” remains
undetermined. We showed it to be the pre-viewed basis-on-which. A
pre-view [of that basis] is constitutive of every instance of ordering.
This pre-viewed basis-on-which is not something that is further or-
dered. That would require having a pre-view of yet a further basis in
terms of which the first pre-viewed basis would be ordered. In other
words, time itself is not thought by way of a synthesis but is prior to
every synthesis, i.e., prior to anything which, like a synthesis, is a de-
termination of the intellect: a concept. Time is a simple manifold that
is given immediately. Space and time are “original presentations,”
where “presentation” refers to an intuiting, not a concept. Thus they
are “original intuitions.”

What you read over and over again in the standard Kant-literature
is that the notion of a “form of intuition” obviously and emphatically
does not mean that time is intuited. But that is a complete misunder-
standing of what Kant intends. The argument goes as follows:

1. Presenting is the presenting of something. And so in this case intu-
iting is the intuiting of something.
§23. Time in the Transcendental Analytic 231

2. But that “something” is an object, and objects are determined by
form and content.

3. But the form is what conditions the intuited object.
4. Therefore, the form cannot itself be intuited.
Or in another form: The notion “a form of intuition” does not mean
that time gets intuited, because otherwise Kant would mean that pure
intuition is intuited, and nothing like that is to be found in Kant.
[278] Well, certainly Kant did not mean to say that the intuiting is
itself intuited. His point, rather, is that the intuited—namely, time—is
intuited (unthematically) as the pre-viewed basis-on-which.

Kant says that what we pre-view as the basis for a manifold to en-
counter the senses—first space and then time—is subjective. But that
certainly does not follow from the phenomenological meaning of a
form of intuition. Kant comes to his position on the basis of a Carte-
sian dogmatism that he took over without further ado. This is the basic
thesis of that dogmatism: What is given first, foremost, and prior to
anything else—i.e., what is given a priori—is the ego cogito. But then
Kant (and not just Kant, but his predecessors also) turned that thesis
on its head in the following way. I have shown (and so has Kant, cor-
rectly and phenomenologically, in his treatment of space and time)
that space and time are given prior to any specific spatial or temporal
thing. That which is given originally in this way belongs to the ego
cogito. But remember now: Descartes says that what is given first and
before anything else is the ego cogito, the cogitationes. But it does not fol-
low that whatever is earlier than something else has to be a cogitatio.
But Kant in fact draws this conclusion. In directing himself to the
phenomena, Kant sees that space and time are something given ante-
cedently as the conditions of the possibility of understanding any mani-
fold at all. But on the basis of Descartes’s dogma this means: Because
it is a priori, what is originally given in this way prior to something else
must be subjective, must be a cogitatio. Therefore, what is primarily and
originally intuited—that which is had in a pre-view—must be an act of
the subject, an intuition in the sense of an intuiting. That’s the sense
in which Kant says that space and time are “pure intuitions.” Here
part of a phenomenological demonstration gets mixed up with a
dogma that in a sense will later smother it. And with that, the whole
problematic of [279] space and time in the Transcendental Aesthetic
falls into a dark pit from which it cannot escape.”

53. [Here (Moser, p. 575) Heidegger ends his lecture of Friday, 29 January
1926, to be followed by that of Monday, 1 February. |]
232 Part II
* * *

We are considering Kant’s idea of time. At all the decisive points of
the Critique of Pure Reason Kant returns to time; it is the phenomenon
that gives his investigation its material continuity. This in itself already
gives a rough idea of the significance that time has within the Kantian
problematic. The way Kant treats time at each of those various points
is also instructive, especially when we consider the peculiar way he
weaves together for a good while a procedure that is phenomenologi-
cal but then goes back to entirely dogmatic and constructivist argu-
ments. Sometimes what he has seen phenomenologically is able to
determine the broader context of his questioning, but at other times
the weight of a dogmatic position simply smothers the effects of his
phenomenological insights. Therefore, a scientific study of Kant (which
I separate from a set of lectures merely aimed at a general education
and the preparation for exams) requires a positive and productive con-
trol of the phenomenological problematic as well as a philosophical
mastery of the central problem of past philosophy since the Greeks.

Kant did not explicitly see the phenomenological problematic. In-
stead, he moved within it, as does every authentic philosophical inves-
tigation. That is, phenomenology is not something unique or unusual,
it is not a certain direction in philosophy, nor a system of philosophy.
Rather, it is something quite obvious although at times difficult to
comprehend, namely that in philosophy one should not blather on
and on but should speak of and from the things themselves. That is
easy to demand, but hard to live up to.

Even today, when phenomenological research proceeds with sure-
ness within certain limits, there are still dogmas, second-hand issues,
obscurities, missed opportunities. There is no such thing as pure phe-
nomenology. In fact by its very essence it is, like all human undertak-
ings, burdened with presuppositions. Philosophically, the point is not to
eliminate these presuppositions at all costs [280] with arguments, but
rather to admit them and to orient the research positively and materi-
ally in terms of those presuppositions. Admittedly, alongside presup-
positions like these there are others that no philosophical investigation
can ever get to. Behind the back of every philosophical problematic
there lies something that philosophy itself, despite its superior degree of
lucidity, does not see; in fact philosophy possesses such lucidity pre-
cisely because it is completely ignorant of that presupposition. And it is
naive and unphilosophical for philosophy to think it has found the truth
for all eternity instead of realizing that philosophy exists only to open
up new areas of focused rather than random progress [toward truth].
Kant’s “weaving together” that I just mentioned is, on the one hand,
due to his ignorance of the phenomenological problematic as well as in
his way of approaching history; but on the other hand it is an essential
§23. Time in the Transcendental Analytic 233
interweaving that no philosophy (much less any particular science) can
eliminate of and by itself.

In our interpretation of Kant we must make do with an expedient
and put the greatest emphasis on understanding the phenomenologi-
cal beginnings, and merely allude to the dogmatic problematics and
theories that Kant inherited. We will especially have to forego an ex-
position of the actual inner connection of the two.

Our basic task will always be to phenomenologically “loosen up”
the phenomena Kant has actually or presumably seen. Only within
that [phenomenological] horizon will we begin to see the outline of
those dogmatic theses. To use those theses as a starting point is to re-
main blind in principle to the exhibition of new phenomena. The best
outcome such an approach can have is to notice the new opinions in
contrast to the earlier ones.

Kant interprets time, like space, as a form of intuition—a form of
inner intuition. The outcome of our analysis was that “form” is the un-
thematically and antecedently presented basis on which [281] a mani-
fold is allowed to encounter the senses. Because the phenomenological
analysis during the last lecture** obviously could not be carried out cor-
rectly, I will repeat it now in a more extensive way, because it is also
materially important for the analysis of certain temporal phenomena.

“Form” —the pre-viewed basis-on-which—has a relation to the sense-
manifold, to the appearances as the indeterminate objects of empirical
intuition. The appearances are indeterminate, i.e., are not determined
within thinking. In this case it means that appearances are not deter-
mined in a determinate act of scientifically thinking the manifold of
appearances as a unity that is nothing other than nature itself. In this
regard, the appearances are indeterminate in the first instance—but
they can be determined. In place of “to determine” Kant also says “to
order.” Considered in relation to scientific thinking, the manifold that
first encounters the senses—which is to say, the appearances—is unor-
dered. However, in themselves the appearances in fact are ordered inso-
far as 1am oriented to them in the lived natural world.

Kant certainly did not investigate the whole dimension of this first-
hand order within the lived world. Rather, from the beginning his
problematic is oriented to the determining and ordering that is carried
out by scientific thinking, and in a sense he based himself on the ap-
pearances only insofar as they were relevant as the possible and neces-
sary terrain of scientific characterization. One may choose to say that
the manifold of appearances—insofar as it is a manifold—is indetermi-
nate or unordered with regard to its determinability by scientific
thinking. However, in the given appearances there is a certain articu-

54. [Friday, 29 January 1926.]
234 Part II

lation: they are given as not nothing, but as a manifold. So, being a
“manifold” is already a certain characteristic of the given; in fact we
have to say that it is already an absolutely primary order—which may
be an absolute Jack of order with respect to scientific determination.

The essential point of the phenomenological analysis of the last lec-
ture was to show the following: If the sense-manifold [282] stands in
an essential relationship to possible ordering, then the very essence of
ordering necessarily requires that the manifold that encounters the
senses has to encounter them on the basis of an antecedent view of
something that makes it possible for a manifold (i.e., whatever is given
as a manifold) to encounter the senses. The very idea of ordering con-
stitutively entails pre-viewing a basis-on-which, and whatever is given
as order-able gets articulated on that basis. Whenever a sense-mani-
fold is given as susceptible of order (whether it is actually ordered or
not), the very giving of that manifold entails a pre-view of [manifold-
ness as such] whereby that manifold is a manifold at all.

From the start Kant takes it as an established fact that a sense-
manifold has an essential relation to being ordered (i.e., to being de-
termined via the understanding). Knowledge has two stems: sensibil-
ity and understanding. Neither can substitute for the other, neither
can be dissolved into the other. Right here at the beginning, the Mar-
burg School’s interpretation of Kant collapses. In positing, quite dog-
matically, these two stems, Kant is backed up to a degree by a long and
venerable tradition of philosophy. From early on, thinkers had distin-
guished (and Aristotle was the first to clarify) atoOnotc (letting-some-
thing-be-given) and vonotc (determining something in thought). And
thus the first part of Kant’s interpretation of knowledge in the Critique
of Pure Reason is called the “Aesthetic.” It deals with atoOnotc or per-
ception. And the second part, which deals with vénotc, is really a
“Noetics,” or as Kant calls it, a “Logic.” Only the togetherness of both,
sensibility and understanding, constitutes knowledge.

As I say, Kant begins with this fact of the two stems. He does not
show in any preliminary and more radical investigation how intuition
and thinking, or being-given and being-thought, are, by their very na-
ture, [283] referred to each other; nor does he show what more original
ontological nexus of human existence itself might perhaps demand this
togetherness and make it possible in the first place. Instead, he bases
himself on tradition as if it were a certain and natural understanding
that realizes as an unproblematic fact that sensibility and understand-
ing belong to knowledge. But such a vague and general reason cannot
be the basis for a profound and fundamental interpretation. Kant pre-
supposes the two stems and then explains the ways they are related.
But this whole approach is precisely the source of some essentially det-
rimental factors. For example, because he divides them at the outset
§23. Time in the Transcendental Analytic 235
and keeps them divided thereafter, he runs up against the problem of
how to mediate these two stems and their functions, how to unify them,
and what might be the underlying basis that supports the real, concrete
unity of knowledge. As a result, Kant thinks he is forced in a way to
dissolve one stem into the other—sensibility into understanding—or in
any event to base sensibility on understanding. He likewise thinks that
he is forced to introduce the phenomenon of the imagination to mediate
them. Kant fails to clarify the imagination phenomenologically; above
all he leaves obscure the imagination’s proper and basic relations to
both sensibility and understanding. Naturally there are some sentences
and interpretations that delineate the relations, but not in the sense of
an actual exposition of these two structures.

Kant has neglected to plow up the field, phenomenologically and
categorially, where these two stems—and especially what is supposed
to mediate them—might grow in the first place. The Idealism that fol-
lowed Kant was bound to neglect this task even more, because it could
no longer muster the sober dispassion and solidity for the job as Kant
had set it out. Husserl is the first one to see and elaborate the funda-
mental importance and universal significance of this task [284] in his
Ideas. People characterize that text as Kantian, but in its foundations it
is essentially more radical than Kant could ever be.

b) The constitutive moments of ordering
On the premise of the intrinsic relation of being-given to being-
thought, and in keeping with Kant’s procedure, we now pursue the
connection of the idea of order with the phenomenon of the form of
intuition. We begin with a specific order within everyday experience
(Kant’s “empirical intuition”), above all in order to show how pre-
viewing belongs to the act of ordering.

Suppose we have a bunch of spheres of different sizes and made of
different kinds of material—and suppose they are be ordered. The
bunch of spheres is unordered, and the task is to sort them out and
group them. But how? The assignment—“The spheres are to be
ordered”—is insufficiently defined because nothing has been said
about what the job entails. We know the unordered is to be ordered,
but the question is: Ordered in terms of what? The job of putting some-
thing in order is adequately defined only when the basis-on-which is
specified. Yes, the assignment could be presented in such a way that
the “how” is not stated. But that does not mean the “basis-on-which”
is not part of the task of ordering or has been forgotten or is not there
because it’s irrelevant. No, the “basis-on-which” has been thought
through so well that it is obvious. The basis-on-which is not defined
but it is still constitutive of the job of putting things in order. As al-
ways, ordering is by nature an ordering on the basis of something. So:
236 Part II

Whenever something is given to and encountered by the senses in
some kind of order, it is given and encountered within a pre-view of
the basis on which it is and can be ordered.

In the case of the spheres, the pre-viewed basis-on-which could be
color. Then all the spheres of the same color, [285] regardless of their
size and material quality, are grouped according to specific colors.
Those colors are taken from out of the given manifold before us, be-
cause I would hardly order them in terms of green if I found no green
spheres in the manifold.

Therefore: (1) A pre-viewing is constitutive for ordering. (2) In the
present case, the pre-viewed basis-on-which [viz., “color”] is to be
drawn from the manifold in front of me. But that is not required. For
example, I could order the spheres serially in terms of the order in
which they catch my eye each time I cast my glace directly at the
manifold. In this case the pre-viewed basis-on-which is not a determi-
nation that belongs to the spheres themselves, but is a possible mode
of a particular way of encountering them, the mode of “immediately-
catches-my-eye.” The fact that some specific element of their make-up
is why they catch my eye does not change the fact that the pre-viewed
basis-on-which is drawn not primarily from the thing itself, because I
am prescinding from whatever it is that makes a sphere catch my eye.
The only “norm” at work each time I cast another glance is: “what-
ever-catches-my-eye-first.”

A basis-on-which that is drawn simply from the things themselves
is distinct and different according to the ontological regions that the
objects belong to. If the task is to put Bach’s fugues in order, color
would certainly be excluded as a possible basis-on-which, as would
material quality.

Here we cannot go into the various ways a pre-view comes to be gen-
erated and achieved. Instead, let us keep this firmly in mind: In any
concrete act of ordering, it doesn’t matter whether or not I am explicitly
aware of pre-viewing, or whether or not I’m committed to having such
a view. All of that is irrelevant to whether a pre-view is present and
operative in that concrete act of ordering or not. The fact that a pre-view
[necessarily] belongs to an act of ordering is prior to all the ways in
which one might carry through that fact or demonstrate it.

It is a given that experience is always ordered experience. Just why
that is constitutive of human existence and its way of being will be
shown later. [286] Underlying such experience is (antecedently and
constitutively) a pre-viewing. This pre-viewing entails that, even when
it is explicitly enacted in the process of carrying out an act of ordering,
the pre-view does not thematically focus on the basis-on-which I order
those things. Pre-viewing the basis-on-which I order things is constitu-
tive for carrying out the ordering, but in the process it is equally unthe-
§23. Time in the Transcendental Analytic 237
matic. The basis-on-which (say, “color” or “material quality”) is cer-
tainly “in view,” but it is not thematically comprehended. That is, Iam
not thematically focused on, e.g., the content of color as such. If I were,
I could never get around to ordering what’s in front of me. The specific
structure of all this is that the pre-viewed basis-on-which is constitutive
for the ordering; but the pre-viewing itself is unthematic. Naturally it
can be rendered thematic at any given moment. But when I do that, I
step out of the specific conduct of ordering something, and I now take
the pre-viewed basis-on-which as the primary given.

This is the analysis of the structure when we track it down in a
concrete, natural process of ordering. However, the dimension of the
problematic that I analyzed in a simple and direct fashion in the last
lecture is something quite different. Say we prescind from the specific,
material, and factual orderedness of things given within a region of
experience. Say we direct our view to the given as such, regardless of
its content, regardless of the specific sense-field it belongs to. If we do
so, we see (and Kant put his finger on this phenomenon right from the
beginning) that whatever is given is a manifold, regardless of any or-
dering that might be relevant. Thus, to be “manifold” is a phenomenal
determination of the given, regardless of whether the given is ordered
or not ordered according to whatever concretely relevant viewpoint.
Take any field of sight—say, a manifold that is a wild whirlwind of
colors without a trace of order to it. Even in this spread of the given—
this buzzing bustle of sensation, as it is often and unclearly put,” [287]
although one is unsure whether it is a given or just a bustling confu-
sion that runs its course in the mind—even this whirlwind of indeter-
minate given objects has the character of being “manifold,” and thus
does have a determination and articulation that in the broadest sense
(and even precisely in Kant’s sense) has to be understood as an order.
Kant’s determinations here are so general and crude that he gives no
further attention to the proper structures of the phenomena.

This primary and phenomenally first order that is given—“a
manifold”—underlies every case of order or lack of order. But that ar-
ticulation of the given, that primary “apartness” [Auseinander] of the
data,*° is a mark of some arrangement, and to that degree it entails the

55. [Given Heidegger’s early allusions to William James in his 1919-1920 lec-
ture-course, Grundprobleme der Phanomenologie (GA 58, p. 10.29-30) and in his
1925 course, Prolegomena zur Geschichte des Zeitbegriffs (GA 20, p. 28.14 / HCT 23.12),
it is possible that the text here is an allusion to James’s phrase—in writing of a
newborn baby’s impression of the world—“one great blooming, buzzing confu-
sion.” See William James, Principles of Psychology (New York: Holt, 1980), p. 462.]

56. [Heidegger’s das Auseinander (very roughly, “the outside-one-another”) is a
nod to the traditional definition of extension as partes extra partes—parts of a whole
238 Part II
following: This phenomenally first arrangement of the manifold stands
within a pre-view, and the object of the pre-view can only be pure
manifold-ness itself—in the external sense of just a multitude charac-
terized by a primary apartness.”

* * *

Everything that encounters the senses is—no matter how indetermi-
nately and variably—a “here” and a “there.” The act of fixing the “there”
underlies every specific concrete order, but does so without calling at-
tention to itself. Take, for example, the manifold of spheres. Each time I
select a sphere, each time I pick up a sphere, I direct myself to that
sphere as something fixed in a “there”—its very own “there”—and I do
so without needing to attend explicitly to its being fixed in a “there.” I
simply do something with the sphere. Even chaos and confusion entail
the apartness of the multitude in terms of here-and-there.

For Kant what is given in inner sense is the simple manifoldness of
one-after-another. This means that the mental stuff encountered [in
inner sense] is encountered as coming-one-after-another, whereas the
physical elements encountered in outer sense are encountered in terms
of the simple manifoldness of next-to-each-other and behind-each-
other. Space and time as the simple manifoldness of next-to-each-other
and one-after-another are that which I pre-view in enabling a manifold
to encounter outer and inner sense respectively. First and most impor-
tantly, all experience lives with determinately ordered things, but in
such a way that as it experiences them, [288] it is not thematically con-
cerned with the content of the pre-view and not even with the pre-
viewed basis-on-which as such. Here we will not discuss the traditional
idea that what is first given are things with their “sensible” qualities.
But this much is already clear: (1) I do live in a pre-view of something
on the basis of which I understand whatever gets ordered in this order;
and (2) the pre-viewed basis-on-which is not thematically noticed. The
pure and thematic pre-viewing of a basis-on-which is not something we
do every day. In the “immediacy” of experiencing and determining, the
specific basis-on-which is not thematic, much less the pre-view of the
pure manifold that lets the manifold encounter the senses.

Although these bases-on-which are unthematic, I do live in them;
and the more they ground the originating pre-views that underlie
everything, the less thematic they are. Those originating pre-views are
that are external to (“apart from”) one another—a philosophoumenon that goes
back at least to book 4, chap. 6 of Ockham’s commentary on Aristotle’s Physics; see
vol. 5 of his Opera philosophica, p. 52.]

57. [Here (Moser, p. 590) Heidegger ends his lecture of Monday, 1 February
1926, to be followed by that of Tuesday, 2 February.]
§23. Time in the Transcendental Analytic 239
the “taken-for-granted.” They do not show up in the arena of everyday
concern and observation, even though they undergird what is imme-
diately given. They are foreign territory to the everyday view, which
always looks to what is close at hand—not just foreign, but inaccessible
to that view—a state of affairs that harbors and hides the enigma for
philosophy.

In a phenomenal sense, it is not just the primary arrangements—
one-next-to-another and one-after-another—that do not stand out.
The pre-views that are bound up with them and the objects of those
pre-views also go unnoticed. Because of the essentially unthematic
character of the pre-view, its object remains completely in the back-
ground, even though, given the fact of its primacy, it is always already
present. Before all others, these two bases-on-which—space and
time—are antecedently in view in and for every instance of a manifold
being able to encounter the senses.

The foregoing should have philosophically clarified what Kant
means when he says that space and time are the “within-which” of a
possible order. However, he also says that space and time are intu-
itions (Anschauungen), (original) presentations (Vorstellungen). [289] If
we take these characterizations literally, unsustainable consequences
follow immediately. Space is a presentation, but in the Kantian sense:
Presenting something (Vorstellen) is one of the “formal conditions of
sensibility that lie a priori in the mind” (B 122-123). Yes, but we have
to ask: Insofar as we experience anything spatially localized as spa-
tially determined, do we really understand it in its spatial manifold-
ness by a pre-view of something mental? Isn’t it ordered, rather, on
the basis of the apartness of sense data? It would seem that Kant’s
manner of speaking and interpreting collide with the obvious phe-
nomenal content of what is actually there in the pre-view. When I put
something in order, am I focused on the basis for the ordering, or am
I focused on some mental state of affairs: the pre-viewing as such?
Kant means the basis-on-which, the object of a pre-viewing, but he is
compelled to interpret it as [the subject’s] act of pre-viewing.

How did Kant come to take the pre-viewed basis-on-which as an act
of pre-viewing, thereby understanding space and time as an act of pre-
senting? Presenting something is obviously a characteristic of the mind,
or in Descartes’s terms, the mens or animus. (Kant’s word Gemiit is simply
a translation of those Latin terms.) So presenting, by its very being, be-
longs to the subject. But in defining space and time as the “wherein” of
ordering, Kant also claims that this “wherein” must reside in the mind,
ready [for sensations]. But why? Why is this “wherein” subjective??®

58. [For Heidegger, the Worinnen is likewise the Worauf—i.e., that “wherein”
sensations can be ordered in terms of certain relations and thus put in a certain
240 Part II

Remember that Kant sees (although very crudely, phenomenologi-
cally speaking) that space and time have a fundamental priority in all
concrete acts of experience. For him, space and time are always al-
ready co-given, not along with anything else but as what precedes,
underlies, and articulates everything else. In traditional terms, space
and time are “a priori.” And there is a position that claims that any-
thing a priori belongs to subjectivity. But this position (whose legiti-
macy has not been demonstrated) is in fact an overturning of
Descartes’s (equally problematic) thesis that [290] what is given ante-
cedently to everything else is solely and properly the ego cogito, the cogi-
tationes. The cogitationes are the way in which the mens or animus (or for
Kant, the Gemiit) has its being. So when anything is shown to have the
character of priority (as is the case with space and time), that means
eo ipso that its kind of being is that of the cogitatio or animus, and in
Kant’s words must “lie ready [in this case, for sensations] in the mind”
(B 34).

Thus, on the basis of their demonstrated a priori character, space
and time are cogitationes, representations residing in the subject “sub-
jectively.” The less problematic Kant found the phenomenal demon-
stration of the apriority of space and time, the more he followed this
dogmatically based interpretation of their apriority. And he found it
unproblematic because he carried it out in such a rough and ready
way. Kant did not probe the structures of ordering as such: the pre-
view itself; having a pre-view; the pre-viewed basis-on-which; and all
the rest. And the reason why Kant could not carry out such analyses
was that he, like the whole tradition before him, and Descartes espe-
cially, lacked any understanding of the basic structure of all these
“presentations” and behaviors—namely, intentionality. Intentionality
is essential for getting a radical comprehension of the problematic, but
it also makes the problematic much broader and more difficult than
Kant could ever have imagined.

Once we comprehend the phenomenological content as shown
here, we have to say that space is what is originally presented in the
kind of pre-viewing we detailed above. Leave aside the fact that Kant,
on the basis of his concept of “subject,” can supply no effectual mean-
ing to what a “subjective form of intuition” is supposed to mean. Even
then, this kind of subjectivity simply does not follow from the phe-
nomenal content. If you take “subjective” as referring to a behavior
that belongs exclusively to human existence, then we might say that
form, is also that on-the-basis-of-which they are so ordered. Every basis-on-which
(Worauf) sensations are ordered is pre-viewed antecedently to any actual order-
ing. Heidegger contests the position that the Worinnen—i.e., the Worauf—is
“subjective.” ]
§23. Time in the Transcendental Analytic 24]
the discovery of a purely measurable space in the world around us is
“subjective,” and that the further elaboration of such space in a geom-
etry is “subjective.” But even that does not in the least say that space is
subjective or that space has anything to do with the subject! [291] I
don’t see why space couldn’t be “objective” and yet still a priori. Of
course the meaning of “a priori” would still have to be worked out as
“what-one-is-antecedently-with.” Let me clarify that.

In experiencing an empirical manifold, we antecedently “have” space
as the object of a pre-view. The possibility of antecedently-viewed-space
can be understood only in terms of the most basic structure of human
existence, which I show to be “being-in.” In turn, being-in can be un-
derstood only in terms of temporality. Therefore, antecedently having
space as the object of a pre-view is grounded in the prior fact of being-
in-the-world, being-in-space—where “being in” has the character of
“being given over to.” *° As soon as we see the problematic in terms of
this original basis, then we can give a phenomenally grounded meaning
to the statement that space is “subjectively given” (i.e., “already resides
in the mind”). “Subjectively given” now means: given with the subject,
which now means: given with human existence, and specifically human
existence as being-in-the-world.

The interpretation of these structures presumes a radically different
basis from the one Kant was able to have on the basis of Cartesian
dogmatism. Last semester® I treated these matters in detail—the spe-
cific foundation of possibility of the givenness of space, its foundation
in human existence itself and particularly in the structure of being-in;
and I stressed that, to the degree it is founded on a Cartesian problem-
atic, the Kantian problematic loses its meaning.

The basic defect underlying this whole problematic reaches much
further back. It is connected with the fact that in the first place one
does not take the phenomena the way they are encountered, but in-
stead uses certain dogmas to construct “states of affairs.” One resists
understanding the structure of human existence itself as a specific
way of being-spatial, or more precisely of being-in-a-space. One resists
seeing that an essential structure of the human way of being is to be
in the world, to be in space—but in a way that is entirely different
[292] from how other things are in space. (I spelled out earlier how
that way is different.) And one resists this primary determination of
the subject as spatial because of an old dogma that still dominates
philosophy—the doctrine (whether we admit it or not) of the immor-

59. [Sein auf does not mean being-“unto” or “toward,” as if there were some point
prior to the unto-ness or toward-ness. Sein auf is another term for Geworfensein: being
a priori immersed in and familiar with “the world,” i.e., the human realm of sense.]

60. [That is, in Summer Semester 1925; see GA 20 and HCT.]
242 Part II

tality and the so-called “spirituality” of human being. Some say that
in their real, true being, humans cannot be in space; otherwise they
would not be immortal. That is, they prejudge the case from the be-
ginning by claiming that human beings are or must be immortal. In
other words, they ground a specific thesis about the ontological struc-
ture of human being on what they believe.

To me, however, it seems that for scientific philosophy the road
should run in the opposite direction, and that the only possible road is
first of all to look at the facts about human existence’s structure and
to make this determination of being-in-space part of the original start-
ing point, and in this way to begin with what we know, not with what
we believe. None of this says that what we believe is impossible. But
making a clean start at questioning clearly means tracking down all
such dogmas that underlie these determinations of person, spirit, and
the like—and getting rid of them. And so we see that underlying an
apparently bland and uncontroversial problem like the being of space
there are theses like the immortality and spirituality of human being;
and that these theses implicitly or explicitly prevent us from seeing
things the way they are. We begin with an ego that is not spatial and
then use some kind of hocus-pocus to work our way into space.

Kant’s position goes back to Descartes as regards this peculiar con-
ception of the a priori as an entity in the sense of a cogitatio. Kant never
got beyond Descartes’s position, nor did he ever question its founda-
tions. One might object that in a noteworthy section of his Critique of
Pure Reason, which is titled [293] “Refutation of Idealism” (B 274-275),
Kant did try to overcome the Cartesian position. But this objection is
mistaken. In that section Kant tries to demonstrate the existence of
things in space; i.e., he thinks it necessary that the being of the outer
world (as we would put it) has to be proven, and he declares it an out-
right scandal that philosophy has no such proof. But insofar as Kant
thinks the outer world must be proven he presupposes the Cartesian
position, namely, that at the start I do not yet securely possess this
curious outer world, but rather have to prove it in the strict philosophi-
cal sense of that word. This refutation of idealism is a refutation only
of material idealism, as Kant puts it; and it is precisely a proof for the
Cartesian position within the Kantian problematic. The reason I men-
tion this peculiar refutation of idealism (which should be compared
with the valuable remark in the Preface to the second edition of the
Critique, see B xxxix), is that we will need to come back to these inter-
pretations in another context—because they are in fact of momentous
significance and, given his position, are the most radical thing Kant
could say about the being of the world in relation to human existence
or the subject. They are even more significant insofar as time is the
guiding thread of the argument. And this is the place where Kant
§23. Time in the Transcendental Analytic 243
makes the greatest advance into the problematic of ur-temporality,
although without breaking through to it. Once again it is clear, espe-
cially in the note later added to that Preface, how Kant was never sure
(in a good sense!) about his position but was always starting over in an
effort to check his theses against the facts. From this constant effort of
Kant’s were born the insights that more or less clearly underlie these
arguments. [294]

c) Form of intuition and formal intuition

In the whole problematic of space, Kant never takes up the more origi-
nal question about how pure geometric space could be discovered by
starting from the space of the lived world. That is because he does not
thematize the whole phenomenal realm of the lived world but instead,
from beginning to end, sticks with his question about measurable
space. Within that realm he distinguishes, of course, between space as
a form of intuition—an original presenting of this pure manifold as
next-to-each-other—and “formal intuition” (Transcendental Deduc-
tion §26, note; B 160-161).

What is meant by space as a form of intuition as distinct from a for-
mal intuition? First, a very general remark. In and through the formal
intuition, space is first determined as the object of a science: the object
of geometry. A form of intuition is the pure manifold, the pure manifold
as such. That is, it is the pre-viewed basis-on-which, and as such it is
unthematic. This basis-on-which can itself be made thematic and can
be comprehended and determined. But determining is a synthesis, and
a synthesis is an act of bringing-together into a unity. The formal intu-
ition, Kant now says, is what gives unity: it attains a determinate spatial
something. Every determinate spatial something—everything deter-
mined in that formal intuition—is for Kant a limiting of the whole of
space. So we could interpret formal intuition as the intuited and thema-
tized object of a pre-view insofar as it is determined in the pure synthe-
sis “which does not belong to the senses” (as Kant says in that note).
This thematized object of a pre-view, this basis-on-which [appearances
are ordered] —in other words, the form of sensible intuition, the form
that gets determined in formal intuition—is possible only insofar as the
form [of intuition] underlies formal intuition, that is, only insofar as the
form already contains the object of the pre-view as a pure manifold of
the corresponding relations.®! [295]

Thus formal intuition is founded on the form of intuition. Insofar as
this is the case (and Kant never understood this in his interpretation),

61. [That is, the pure form antecedently has (as the content of a pre-view)
space and time as pure manifolds, but always and only in terms of the relations
that give them their form.]
244 Part II

formal intuition belongs to space and not to the understanding. None-
theless, one could say: If pure manifoldness (space as the form of intu-
ition) is determined by synthesis, and if synthesis, precisely as pure
synthesis, is the act of the understanding, then space, insofar as it is
determined by the synthesis of understanding, no longer belongs to
sensibility. But in his note, Kant says the exact opposite. Why must he
say that? Because the unity that always underlies this pure synthesis,
this bringing-together, is not a unity in the sense of a concept of un-
derstanding (a category). Rather, the unity in and through which I
bring together spatial constructions and determinations, is itself a kind
of space. That is, the limitations of space—points, lines, surfaces, and
such—are themselves space.

Kant saw that there is in this case an entirely original synthesis—a
very peculiar “synthesis”—that necessarily belongs to space precisely
because its unity (the unity correlative to it) itself has a spatial charac-
ter. In the last sentence of his note, Kant says:

For since through it {i.e., the synthesis} (as the understanding determines

the sensibility) space or time are first given as intuitions {i.e., first properly

as determined intuitions}, the unity of this a priori intuition belongs to

space and time, and not the concept of the understanding. (B 161)

Many have taken exception to the words “are given” and have sug-
gested that Kant changed his way of speaking here because elsewhere
he says that something is thought by way of synthesis and is given by
way of intuition, whereas here he says that something—namely, this
unity—is given by way of synthesis. Kant has to speak this way because
the unity itself has a spatial character. And we need not invoke some
change in terminology or identify an allegedly vague use of language.
Rather, we should see that he had to say “given” in this case, even
though the [296] synthesis cannot be given in itself. But in this case it
can be given, because what the synthesis gives—the unity—is space: a
spatial determination in the form of a limiting of space. What is more,
Kant wrote the word “given” in italics—so we should presume that, in
employing the term, he gave some thought to it and, given the difficulty
of the analysis here, did not use some vague form of talking.

Kant’s remark above has played an enormous role in the literature on
Kant. The Marburg School, for example, has interpreted it in a way dia-
metrically opposed to the way that I just did. Because Kant says here
that space is a formal intuition—a synthesis—the Marburg School con-
cluded that in the final analysis space in Kant is therefore something
that has to do with the understanding—synthesis—and therefore we
must try to deduce space from the pure activity of the understanding.
But the exact opposite is the case, and it is precisely this note that shows
§23. Time in the Transcendental Analytic 245
how Kant emphasized, and always maintained, the autonomy of pure
intuition over against the activity of the understanding. A. J. Dietrich
has made most headway in interpreting this passage, in his Kants Begriff
des Ganzen in seiner Raum-Zeitlehre und das Verhdltnis zu Leibniz (1916).
But I must say that in the final analysis not even Dietrich has under-
stood the proper sense of this passage, because he tries to explain this
word “given” in the note as a vague use of language instead of showing
the opposite: this word is demanded by the issue itself.

So the formal intuition that Kant discusses is founded on the form
of intuition. This distinction makes it clear what Kant means (on my
interpretation): This possible pre-viewed basis-on-which, which is
constantly unthematic in ordinary experience, can be thematized;
and when it is thematic, it is a delimited field of objects proper to a
specific science, namely, geometry. Now, insofar as geometry is a con-
stitutive moment in mathematical physics and in the mathematical
sciences of nature themselves, [297] this distinction will naturally
have essential significance for understanding the epistemological
structure of mathematical-physical knowledge.”

* * *

To return to the question of time, we must say that, as regards the
philosophical understanding of time, the dogmatic argument about
the a priori status of time has gained us nothing as regards the subjec-
tivity of time. For even if we were to grant that, in distinction to space,
time is in fact “subjective,” it still has not been shown how and why
time as time—and not just as a form of intuition—can be the “wherein”
of the ordering of all appearances in inner sense. There is nothing that
explains that such time is subjective. One simply asserts that it is,
using the same dogmatic arguments as with space. And above all it is
not shown that time is only a form of intuition of inner and outer
sense. And to go in the opposite direction, it is not even shown to what
degree and in what way subjective time can at all be objective, and
what this objectivity means. Only in demonstrating that do we show
that a general determination of time is possible and, on that basis, an
empirical determination of time.

So much for the understanding of the relevant content of the con-

62. [Albert Johannes Dietrich, Kants Begriff des Ganzen in seiner Raum-Zeitlehre
und das Verhdltnis zu Leibniz (Halle: Max Niemeyer, 1916). The text was the au-
thor‘s Habilitationsschrift at the University of Berlin, and was issued as no. 50 in the
series, Abhandlungen zur Philosophie und ihrer Geschichte; the first edition has
been reprinted (Hildesheim and New York: Olms, 1975).]

63. [Here (Moser, p. 606) Heidegger ends his lecture of Tuesday, 2 February
1926, to be followed by that of Thursday, 4 February, which opened with a 500-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
246 Part II
ception of time in general as a form of intuition. To repeat: In my in-
terpretation, time is the unthematically presented basis-on-which,
one that accompanies every act of letting a manifold be encountered
as such, insofar as that manifold becomes accessible through inner
sense. In his Anthropology §4, Kant says that inner sense “sees the rela-
tions of its modification [i.e., of whatever determines it] only in time,
and therefore in flux, where the stability of observation that is neces-
sary for experience is lacking.”** The inner sense is nothing other than
empirical apperception, i.e., the empirical self-consciousness in which
self-consciousness, the self or I, is encountered simply as an object, not
a subject. [298]

d) Space and time as given infinite magnitudes;

quantum and quantitas in Kant’s interpretation
According to Kant, space and time are forms of intuition, not objects
that are intuited. And yet in the same context in which he explains
space and time (in the Transcendental Aesthetic), Kant also gives an-
other characterization of space and time, in terms of their content.
Although he says that space and time are forms of intuition and thus
cogitationes, he also says: “Space is presented as a given infinite magni-
tude” (B 39).

In this second case space is obviously not understood as a form of
intuition, but is understood from the point of view of content, i.e., as
an “object,” although, as we will soon see, certainly not in the Kantian
sense of that word, namely, an objectivity that is thought through syn-
thesis. Concerning time, Kant therefore says: “The original presenta-
tion ‘time’ {Kant means: time as presented} must be given as unlim-
ited” (B 48). So even though space and time are not objects, they are
nonetheless presented, they are a “presented.” They are what is pre-
viewed in a pre-view. In fact, here space and time are understood to
be prior to all determinations, i.e., not as formal intuitions but as forms
of intuition.

To illustrate this first determination of the content of space and
time that we recognize—namely, as an infinite given magnitude—we
have to go back to our analyses of the phenomena of ordering and pre-
view. In interpreting the determination of space and time that we now
have before us, we will stick with the formulation in the first edition,
where Kant says much more clearly: “Space is presented as an infinite
given magnitude” (A 25). If you recall my earlier analyses of the given-

64. Akademie-Ausgabe, vol. 7, p. 134. [In translation as Immanuel Kant, Anthro-
pology from a Pragmatic Point of View, trans. Mary J. Gregor (The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff, 1974), p. 15. I gloss Gregor’s “its modifications” (seiner Bestimmungen)
above. |
§23. Time in the Transcendental Analytic 247
ness of a manifold, you will remember that I demonstrated the follow-
ing: A manifold that is given as a manifold—i.e., in the character of
manifold-ness, and specifically in the character of spatially one-out-
side-another and one-next-to-another [299]—that manifold, insofar
as it is given and given as a manifold with the above characteristics,
can be understood only by way of a pre-view or pre-understanding of
manifoldness as such, in this case, of apartness as such. Without such
a pre-understanding of apartness as such, it would be utterly impos-
sible for anything spatial to be given. We need not have a concept—a
specific categorial consciousness—of a manifold gua apartness. The
unthematic pre-view suffices. And according to Kant this pure mani-
fold—space—is something that, by its very way of being, has to be
given. Space is a given-and-presented [Raum ist Gegeben-Vorgestellt] .

To make that clearer: “Given” is distinct from “thought.” So “given”
means: not thought, neither produced nor producible by the under-
standing and its basic activity of combining. This manifold is encoun-
tered in the field of the outer senses; and we will not take it only as a
spatial one-outside-another. That manifold is not articulated simply in
such a way that, within the manifold, one thing is distinguished from
another, and that other from yet another, etc., so that, within this given
manifold, this would not be that, and that would not be this. In other
words, what we encounter is not a simply multitudo, as the Scholastics
would put it, something “just-different-in-general.” The character of
manifoldness in this manifold that we encounter is not a simple empty
otherness. No, we encounter the manifold in terms of its manifoldness.
This manifoldness must itself be given in its own particular way, be-
cause the articulations made on the basis of this manifoldness are rele-
vant to the issue in this sense: This is not simply different from that, but
is next to that, and that is behind this; and yet another is under or over
that. These specific characters—next to, behind, in front of, under—are
ones that, even if I had all the time in the world, I could never conjure
up by pure thought out of the mere distinction of one thing from an-
other. [300] Next to, behind, in front of, under—these have to be given—
which means that, of their essence, they are the pre-viewed that is given
in a pre-view. And as what is essentially given—i.e., given as this deter-
minate manifoldness as such—they are the condition that makes pos-
sible a determining comprehension of a specific “next to” or “over” or
“under.”

Therefore, these features—next to, over, under, in front of, behind—
that make up the pure manifoldness of space in general, are conditions
of possibility of every possible determinate spatial relation. That means
that “next to,” “over,” and “under” are not determinate kinds of rela-
tions—they are not species of the genus “relation-in-general” —any more
than intuition is a species of concept. “Relation-in-general” simply can-
248 Part II

not be determined to a particular species called “Next to” or “Under,”
because relation-in-general is not the underlying basis of the “next to”
and the “under” and the “over” in the sense of making them possible—
as if first there had to be “relation” in order that there could be a “next
to.” It’s the other way around. Only because the next-to is intrinsically
what it is, can it, qua next-to, be understood as a relation. If I determine
the “next-to” or the “under” as relations, I say nothing about them as a
“next-to” or as an “under.” “Relation” is also a feature of phrases like
“more boring than” or “more stupid than.” As regards their content,
“more boring than” and “next to one another” have nothing to do with
each other. They are completely disparate, and yet I can determine both
of them as relations. So, in calling both of them “relations,” I am saying
nothing. That is, “relation” says nothing about the content that belongs
to the essence of “next-to” or “under.”

In keeping with its essential content, this pure manifoldness—space—
has to be given. And it underlies all particular spaces, which themselves
are specific limitations of space. We also say that spaces are “this or that
large” according to certain ways of measuring them. But space itself, the
pure manifold, is not [301] “this or that large,” but is what makes it pos-
sible for anything to be “this or that large.” So when Kant says that
space and time are infinite given magnitudes, he does not mean they
are something “infinitely large.” I will delay for a bit my interpretation
of the word “infinite,” but the word “magnitude” in this context means
the same as “quantity,” or as Kant puts it, quantum. The way Kant uses
Latin terms here is the exact opposite of German usage, and this has
easily led (and continues to lead) to a misunderstanding. When Kant
wants to indicate that “magnitude” refers to quantity, he uses the word
quantum. But when he wants to indicate that it refers to this or that
“quantum” —i.e., a specific amount—he uses quantitas.° In German we
put it the other way around. We call a ration of beer a quantum, and
what we mean is: this much beer as regards quantity. So we use quantum
for “this much” or “that much,” and we use “quantity” for much-ness.
Kant uses the words in the opposite sense, and he has his own good
reasons for doing so. He cannot use the word “quantity” to indicate that

65. [To belabor the point: (1) In general usage, the Latin quantum (from the
adjective quantus) has to do with a concrete, specific amount of this or that. (Ques-
tion: “How much iron?” Answer: “That much iron.” — Quaestio: “Quantum ferrum?”
Responsio: “Tantum ferrum.”) (2) The Latin quantitas is an abstract noun that indi-
cates not a specific “this much” or “that much,” but the general “how-much-zess”
of this or that. But Kant inverts these two meanings, as if he were translating
Quantitas non est qualitas (Quantity is not quality) by Quantum non est quale. That is:
to indicate Grofe (“magnitude”) in the abstract sense of Grofheit, Kant uses quan-
tum rather than quantitas; to indicate Gréfe in the sense of a concrete, specific so
und so grof, he uses quantitas.]
§23. Time in the Transcendental Analytic 249
space is a magnitude, because “quantity” for Kant is a determination
that belongs to the understanding—it is a category—and Kant wants to
insist that space is something given and that this condition of givenness
is of the very essence of space.

This, then, is how we should understand the meaning of Gréfe or
magnitude: as quantity. Now, what does it mean when Kant says that
space (as well as time) is an infinite magnitude? “Infinite” is a determi-
nation of quantity; that is, according to its idea, it has to do with the
question of how-much. Regardless of whether we can determine the
how-much makes no difference to the meaning of “infinite”—it still
refers to a certain quantity: an endless quantity—or as one says, a
quantity that I can go on determining ad infinitum without ever reach-
ing a limit. But the ability to be endlessly determined (in the sense of
“never reaching an end”) is not and cannot be the meaning of “infi-
nite” in this context, at least so long as “magnitude” means the same
as “quantity.” “Quantity” —the essence of every determined quantum—
can never have this or that size. And that means: by its very essence,
it can never be subjected to endless determination. [302] Rather, mag-
nitude in the sense of quantity—as an endlessly ongoing determin-
ing—is the finitely infinite condition of possibility of being-quantitative,
which is what underlies everything that has this-or-that quantum.

But then what is meant by an “infinite” magnitude? From what I
said about “endlessness,” it is clear that “infinite” does not refer to
something in the field of continuity but rather something that under-
lies continuity itself and that Kant expresses in this way: Space and
time are infinite magnitudes. This means that insofar as space and
time get determined, they are always in relation to what is determined
as the whole is in relation to the part. The character of wholeness is
essentially different from the character of the part, or more exactly,
the character of part-ness. If I begin with something that is, by es-
sence, a part and that is unable to exist except as a part (as is the case
with any specific space as contrasted with space as such) —if I begin
with what is essentially a part, I will never get to the whole. Every
part—in this case, every specific space, even if we can think of it as
determinable ad infinituam—and therefore even an infinite space, a
space that can be determined ad infinitum—always presupposes space
as a whole. Therefore, this infinity in the sense of the unlimitedness
of proceeding, is possible only on the basis of the infinity that Kant
now understands as “the whole.” Kant never investigates and deter-
mines the concepts of “infinite” and “finite” in a univocal sense (the
terms have various meanings in Kant). Nonetheless it is clear that in
the present context he is using the words “infinite” and “infinity” in
Descartes’s sense of infinitudo. Descartes himself, however, did not de-
termine infinitudo in a positive sense. Speaking of it in his Meditations,
250 Part II
he said that every finite thing (finitum) is infinitely different from the
infinite (infinitum). That means there is no bridge between the two—
or more exactly, the very notion of bridging them by moving forward
into the infinite is itself a finite notion.

“Space as an infinitely given magnitude” means to say that space is
always the whole within which all spaces are merely parts, and that
all these parts are themselves space. The word “infinite” in the above
determination [303] of space and time has nothing to do with deter-
minability—i.e., has nothing to do with limits and lack of limits—be-
cause determinability entails synthesis; and as Kant says, every syn-
thesis, even if it goes on ad infinitum, is finite—precisely as a synthesis,
i.e., as a form of determining. Earlier I stressed that Kant does not use
the words “infinite” and “finite” in a univocal sense, any more than
he does so with “magnitude.” The reason is, in part, that throughout
their history these concepts have played an important role and have
undergone continual modification.

We have tried to give a phenomenological interpretation of what
Kant means by his simple and lapidary propositions about space and
time as infinite given magnitudes, and from what we have said, it
should now be clear where the difficulties lie regarding a more precise
determination of these phenomena: they lie in understanding how
wholeness relates to part-ness, and in seeing which categorial modifi-
cations are possible here. As of today, even the most elementary struc-
tures of these basic concepts still elude us despite all efforts to work
them out. Once again it is Husserl who has made the only independent
and productive advances, in Logical Investigations, volume 2, Third In-
vestigation, “On the Theory of Wholes and Parts.”°°

Later we will show the intrinsic consistency of these determina-
tions that Kant gives to space and time: infinite, magnitudes, given,
presented. In a different formulation, Kant says in one place that “all
the parts of space, even unto infinity, are simultaneous” (B 40). This
phrase “simultaneous, even unto infinity” points to the primary
givenness of space as a whole. And in his Reflexionen, no. 4046, he
says: “As regards potential simultaneity, time is infinite. Thus we pre-
sent space as actualiter infinite.”

This means that in every “now” the unlimited pure manifoldness of
space is present. In the “now” as such—and therefore, in time—there
are no limits and boundaries by which we might determine how much
[304] space could be present in a “now.” Rather, in every “now” the
entirety of space can be presented. You can see that, even as we bring

66. Logical Investigations, vol. 2, pp. 433-489.

67. Reflexionen zur Metaphysik, in Akademie-Ausgabe, vol. 17, p. 397. [Actualiter:
“in actuality” or “actually.” ]
§23. Time in the Transcendental Analytic 251
a robust phenomenological interpretation, Kant in these passages has
already penetrated deep into the structures of space, structures that
later became, for Hegel above all, the bases for his interpretation of the
“punctuality” of space in terms of the “now.”°8

To a certain degree we have now delineated the object of the pre-
view, i.e., the form of intuition, as regards its content. As an infinite
given magnitude, time is the condition of the possibility of experienc-
ing and determining a specific delimited one-after-another. If we want
to say that time is taken “quantitatively” here, we need to understand
that in a philosophical, categorial way. It does not mean that time is
“quantified.” It means, rather, that time is understood as the object of
a pre-view concerned with order, and as such it is what makes it pos-
sible to order a quantity of one-after-another.

On the basis of his conception—his double conception—of space and
time as (1) forms of intuition and (2) infinite given manifolds, Kant is
now able to determine them directly as “sources of knowledge” (B 55).
That is, in every act of experiential ordering and determining, space and
time are the sources from which we can and must draw. Time is a source
of knowledge—that is the fundamental interpretation of time, and it
underlies and supports everything else that Kant has to say about time.

Even if this interpretation is not unambiguous, nonetheless, by fol-
lowing this guiding thread, Kant manages to provide a series of fresh
conclusions about the function of time, even though it is still unde-
cided whether they can be sustained in the form in which they are
presented. Up to this point we have gained the following determina-
tions about time:

1. Time is the form of inner intuition.

2. Time is an intuition.

3. Time is an infinite given magnitude.

4. Time is a source of knowledge.

(In this hardly clear list, we are immediately struck by the difference
in character between the first, second, and fourth determinations
[305] and the third one.) Using these determinations we have to make
two things clear: how it was possible for Kant to assign time a preemi-
nent role (even higher than space) in the interpretation and knowl-
edge of nature; and how Kant, in clarifying this fundamental role of
time, entered the arena of the problematic which we designate as ur-
temporality and which we are trying to approach, indirectly, by tak-

68. [Heidegger later refers to this same issue in Being and Time, §82(a), with
reference to Hegel’s Encyclopedia of the Sciences, §257 (Addendum) and §254
(Addendum).]
252 Part II
ing our clues from Kant. We will have to come back to these determi-
nations so as to use them to show why the problematic of the
ur-temporal remained hidden from Kant.°’
* * *
§24. The function of time in the Transcendental Logic.
A characterization of the problematic
First we tried to orient ourselves concretely regarding the general way
Kant comes at time, and in so doing we have intentionally left unex-
plained Kant’s specific formulation of the problem that drives these
considerations. Our interpretation took us back to the context that
Kant for his part never researched or even envisioned. Kant’s basic
aim (to which these considerations in the Transcendental Analytic
belong and which they help to realize) is different from a thematic
analysis of knowledge or consciousness as such. Our task now is to
understand that basic aim more precisely, so as to fundamentally clar-
ify (1) the problem-context within which the phenomenon of time, as
we have characterized it, operates, and (2) the way of treating the
phenomenon of time which the basic problem-context prescribes. If it
turns out to be no accident that time shows up in all the decisive parts
of the Critique of Pure Reason, then in the final analysis we will have to
formulate the problematic of the Critique [306] in such way that the
question of time stands at the center of that problematic.

I now want to spell out this central problematic, which is not ex-
plicit in Kant, and clarify it, starting with what we have already ex-
plained. From our encounters so far with Kant’s determinations of
space and time, what guidelines for our research have emerged?
Within empirical intuition Kant finds pure intuition. In the empirical
intuition of the outer world he finds space; in the empirical intuition
of one’s own self he finds time; and indeed, space and time are the
conditions of the possibility of the givenness of the manifold of their
respective areas. But what form of research led Kant to find anything
like conditions of the possibility of givenness? He investigates empiri-
cal intuition and looks for conditions of possibility in that intuition.
That is, he looks for what it is in empirical intuition—or more exactly:
in what is intuited in empirical intuition—that is already prior to em-
pirical intuition. And why precisely in empirical intuition? Because
empirical intuition is the primary form in which knowledge is carried

69. [Here (Moser, p. 619) Heidegger ends his lecture of Thursday, 4 February
1926, to be followed by that of Friday, 5 February, which opened with a 750-word
summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
§24. Function of time in Transcendental Logic 253
out. Kant investigates knowledge—and more precisely, scientific
knowledge—in terms of the conditions of its possibility. And why is it
that he investigates scientific, theoretical knowledge in terms of the
conditions of its possibility? What motivated this investigation? An-
swer: Kant’s concerns for a scientific metaphysics, i.e., scientific knowl-
edge of three specific entities: God, the soul, and the world.

Kant asks: What elements constitute scientific knowledge of enti-
ties? And he investigates scientific knowledge not in order to demolish
metaphysics but in order to find a scientific metaphysics. He is looking
for a touchstone that would tell him whether what has been put for-
ward up to now as scientific knowledge of God, the soul, and the world
can be and is scientific knowledge at all. [307] Kant’s aim was not set
on the limits of knowledge but on the positive possibility of knowl-
edge. The fact that he came up against limits was a trick that the issues
played on him. The fact that he respected these issues shows that he
understood how to philosophize.

As we said, there are two stems constitutive of knowledge: sensibil-
ity and understanding. If we want to assert something about an entity
and to determine it in its being by such a statement, the entity first of
all has to be given fo the act of determining. So we have to ask about
both the conditions of the possibility of the giving of the entity, and
the conditions of the possibility of the scientific determining of the
entity that has been given. This means that in the second question we
ask about the conditions of the possibility of the connection between
the conditions of the possibility of one stem and that of another. Only
when we show the conditions of the possibility of the connection of
those two sets of conditions have we philosophically conceptualized
knowledge, as regards its possibility, from out of the unity of the two
stems. Which means: The fundamental task is to interpret the being of
this very unity; and in turn: we can meaningfully ask and answer that
question only if we first achieve an understanding of being as such.

But this formulation of the question—as a question about the condi-
tions of the possibility of the connection of the conditions of sensibility
and understanding—is still too empty and formalistic, and it hardly cor-
responds to the concrete focus that Kant’s investigation had in view.
The question is further trivialized if it is posed as an inquiry into form
and content, or if one goes even further and asks how the unity of form
and content manages to agree with the object. In those cases one is ask-
ing questions that never crossed Kant’s mind. When Kant talks about
form and content, these concepts have a completely concrete meaning
that has arisen from actual investigation. [308] They are not the up-
rooted and groundless concepts that are so much in use today.

In his investigation, Kant presses ahead and inquires about the prior
element in scientific knowledge as such. What is already given before-
254 Part II

hand in everything that is given empirically? What is already thought
beforehand in everything that is understood as given-and-thought? The
latter question asks what makes possible the “determinedness” (the
thought-ness) of the given. Now, to determine and to think mean to
combine a manifold that has been given. Hence the question: What
makes possible the combining of the given? That question is not simply
identical with: “What makes possible the unification of understanding
and sensibility?” Rather, the first question (“What makes possible the
combining of the given?”) prepares for the second one; or more exactly,
it shows that the second question cannot be posed in that fashion.

The relevant question in the investigation is about what must a pri-
ori underlie the combinability of a given manifold. Combining is an
act of the understanding. Therefore, what gets combined is what is
given to the understanding. But the understanding is cogitatio. There-
fore, for Kant (given his Cartesian orientation) the only thing that can
be given to and combined with the understanding (“internally,” he
says) is what itself has the character of a cogitatio. Which means: pre-
sentations are what get combined. However, the presentations that are
to be combined are given as a manifold of inner sense. And the mani-
fold of this manifold of inner sense has the character of next-to-each-
other and one-after-another—in other words, the character of time.
Therefore, the presentations that are combinable by the understand-
ing are in fact combinable [only] by way of a pre-view of time. So now
we understand the question in more precise terms: What makes pos-
sible the combinability of the pure manifold, i.e., the combinability of
time? To combine is always to determine. And so: What makes possi-
ble the determinability of time?

This is the central question that Kant did not ask but that nonethe-
less [309] underlies the question he does ask about the general deter-
mination of time as such. The question about the general determina-
tion of time as such is the question toward which the Transcendental
Logic’s positive investigation of the Analytic of Principles and finally
the Analogies [of Experience] flows. To go to the heart of the matter:
This question is the principle guiding question toward which every-
thing else converges. But this question about a general determination
of time contains the more radical question about the conditions of the
possibility of the determinability of time as such.

What is to be determined is time as a pure manifold. Or to put it more
precisely: What is to be determined is the manifold that has the charac-
ter of time thanks to a pre-view of this manifoldness, “time.” Thus, deter-
mining this manifold requires a pre-viewed unity on the basis of which
a particular “combined” is a specific unified something.”

70. [Cf. Moser transcript, p. 627.30-32.]
§24. Function of time in Transcendental Logic 255

Let us anticipate the problematic and delineate it in a general way.
Kant says: The unity of all combining—and thus the possibility of
combinability at all—is grounded in the transcendental apperception,
the “I think.” So now we confront the question: What is the condition
of the possibility of the determinability of time as such in an “I think”?
Or even more precisely: What is the condition of the possibility that
time as such and an “I think” be together? Let me stress: I am radical-
izing the problematic of Kant’s Critique in terms of this question. If you
say that this question cannot be found in the Critique, I readily admit
you are right. But we must ask whether this is not the question that
first makes the entire problematic of the Critique intelligible.

In his Cartesian way, Kant thinks that everything that can be dem-
onstrated as prior (a priori) in what is known in an act of knowing must
belong to the subject. This means that time, as an intuition, is some-
thing that already operates in the mind; and it means that the “I think”
is an act of spontaneity of the mind. Thus the question becomes that of
the connection between time qua intuition and the “I think”—both as
determinations of the mind. It becomes the question about the basic
context of [310] subjectivity, or as I would say: of human existence. It is
quite clear in Kant’s research that he unquestionably had in mind this
horizon that I have just been explaining. Both in his doctrine of sche-
matism (B 180-181), where he deals with the action of time, as well as
in the Transcendental Deduction, where he deals with the “I think” and
synthesis, Kant says that the state of affairs is veiled and obscure. But he
lets these contexts remain in their hiddenness.

Let me repeat once more: This is about the conditions of the possibil-
ity of a conjunction between time as such and the “I think” as such. On
the one hand time is the form of the manifold that underlies all acts of
thinking qua determining; and on the other hand the “I think” is what
must be presupposed as providing a possible unity to every act of com-
bining in thought. The two fundamental elements—pure manifold as
such and pure unity as such, both of them as the a priori of a determin-
ability as such—this is the problem that underlies the real issue in Kant’s
investigation. Only if we pose the question in this way, i.e., about the
conditions of the possibility of the ontological connection between both
determinations of the mind (namely, time as pure intuition and the “I
think” as an act of the mind’s spontaneity), do we comprehend the
question philosophically. But at the same time that entails something
else, namely: Yes, interpreting this ontological connection between
time and the “I think” is the basic task; but on the other hand, I can put
this task in motion only if, in asking about the being of this ontological
connection, I have a clear notion of what being in general means.

Post-Kantian Idealism also attempted to solve the problem of the
unity of sensibility and understanding. However, in trying to do so, it
256 Part II

did not pursue (much less see) the relevant presuppositions that Kant
had left undeveloped. Instead, it continued to pursue the question in
the Kantian (more exactly, [311] in the Cartesian) fashion, by putting
the emphasis from the beginning on the “I think,” on the I, so as to
understand knowledge from the I as starting point and from a still
more original determination of the activity of the I as the pure-fact-of-
activity, a Tathandlung. In Hegel, the problem appears to be directed
entirely toward the objective; but he holds fast to the same problem,
and in fact his whole philosophy cannot be understood at all unless
we keep it within the horizon of this question. The only thing is that
the question gets displaced in Hegel and becomes more obscure due to
fact that his solution to the problem is extremely Kantian, but at the
same time he has recourse to Greek ontology in its objective orienta-
tion. He thus gives the false impression of actually solving the prob-
lem, whereas in fact all he does is completely obfuscate it. What I
mean is that, in trying to solve Kant’s problem, Hegel utilized every
possible means generated by the history of philosophy theretofore.
The intrinsic need to do so comes from Hegel’s impulse toward dialec-
tics, and the intrinsic consequence was that he understood his philo-
sophical position as the absolute completion of all philosophy up until
then.

And so, as we ask about the possibility of the being of a connection
between time as such and the “I think” as such, we must pose the
question more radically, and that means not orienting ourselves to-
ward any determinate theses. It is not a matter of championing a new
standpoint, as the Romantic Idealists did, but rather of getting in our
sights the unresolved issues in Kant’s position. And philosophers must
have patience, regardless of whether they do or do not find the truth.
Kant works with and within this connection of time and the “I
think”—with and within, yes; but without ever asking about the con-
nection itself. But as Kant works within his concrete investigation into
this connection—an investigation that is the most exciting that can be
found in scientific philosophical literature—he reaches the limits of
what can possibly be asserted about time. And these are limits that
were posed to him by his whole approach to the question. [312]

What we want to understand now is (1) the meaning behind Kant’s
way of treating time in this context, and (2) what positive features of
time emerge from that treatment—so that, beginning from a “negative
example” (so to speak), we might understand the problem of ur-
temporality. To do that, we need at least a rough understanding of
Kant’s problematic, but one that is concrete enough to prevent us from
reducing Kant’s problem to an empty formula; but, by rearticulating
that problematic, to promote our effort to get to the issues and phe-
nomena. So first of all we need an adequate understanding of Kant’s
§24. Function of time in Transcendental Logic 257
problematic: Why did he assign this basic role to time? And how did
he justify that basic role of time?

We said that, for Kant, scientific knowledge has to be studied within
the horizon of the question of the possibility of a scientific metaphysics.
And the best guide in investigating knowledge is scientific knowledge.
But for Kant, scientific knowledge means mathematics, and specifically
mathematical natural science. A science is scientific only insofar as it
contains a mathematics. But we must understand correctly. Kant as-
signs this preeminent role not to mathematics as such but to mathemat-
ics as an a priori discipline. Thus he understands mathematics more as
Descartes and Leibniz do: as mathesis. Kant certainly does not think that
if a scientific metaphysics (a scientific knowledge of God) is to be pos-
sible, it will have to be “mathematical” in the usual sense. As Kant un-
derstands the word, in order to be “mathematical” a science must be
demonstrable and universally valid in its a priori foundations. The same
meaning of the word is found in Spinoza’s determination of “geometric”
in the phrase more geometrico [“in geometric fashion,” in the title of the
Ethica|. Kant’s question is about the possibility of a scientific metaphys-
ics—the possibility of [313] a scientific knowledge of certain entities:
God, the world, and human being—not a scientific knowledge of num-
bers or of geometrical figures. That is why Kant has to orient his ques-
tion about the conditions of the possibility of scientific knowledge in
terms of the scientific knowledge of the entities of nature.

Like the preceding interpretation, the one that follows is phenome-
nological, i.e., we will push through to what Kant implicitly had to have
in mind. In any philosophy that offers possibilities leading to the issue,
this is the path we have to take—the only philosophical path. That is:
we have to confront the philosopher in a communicative dialogue and
help him be born aright. This is no novelty. It is Socrates’ ancient method
of maieutics. In confronting him, we also run the risk of finding (as is
now not the case with Kant) that everything will end up in complete
confusion and obscurity. The question that is relevant right now is:
What is known a priori in mathematical natural-scientific knowledge?
More precisely: What determinations reside within what-is-known by
this knowledge as such? The fact that we can pose the question this
precisely has been made possible by Husserl’s clear (or relatively clear)
elaboration of this problematic in his Ideas for a Pure Phenomenology. The
question is: What resides within the whole of the what-is-known in
mathematical physics? And what are the essential determinations of
this what-is-known that characterize it as what it is, namely, nature?”!

71. [Here (Moser, p. 634) Heidegger ends his lecture of Friday, 5 February
1926, to be followed by that of Monday, 8 February, which opened with a 315-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
258 Part II
§25. The question of the unity of nature

We first ask the question in a way that Kant himselfin fact did, namely:
What resides in what-is-known in mathematical natural-scientific
knowledge? What belongs to [314] the known as such? This question
is not asking about the totality of the results these sciences produce
but rather about the thought-content of any and every result qua result
of mathematical physics. To put it more precisely: not the thought-
content but rather what /as to be thought, i.e., what belongs to the
known as-such in any mathematical natural science. In the most gen-
eral terms this known-as-such is nature.

Phenomenologically understood, nature is an entity which can be
discovered within the world and of which it can be said that it under-
lies all worldly things and all worldly ontological connections insofar
as they are determined by materiality—in short, nature can be found
in everything of the world. Now, as such an entity, nature is accessible
in various ways. In one instance, for example: we come to an under-
standing of nature by way of the things-of-use that are most immedi-
ately given in our lived world. For example, when I lift up a chair and
let it fall, I can observe “falling” in that chair—because certainly the
chair falls not because it is a chair but because it is consists of wood.
Insofar as I understand it as nature, I have to first of all prescind from
...—I prescind from it insofar as it is a chair. As regards this “falling”
as a way of being, there is no difference between this chair and that
walking stick or hat, or any other thing-of-use. That, then, is one way
that nature becomes accessible: by way of an understanding that pre-
scinds from the primary character of things.

We can also experience nature pre-scientifically in the direct way,
as when I speak of a waterfall out there in nature, or of fir cones that
fall from trees out there in nature, or of a chunk of stone that cracked
off from a boulder and fell. So, I have nature in the sense of “nature
out there” just as originally as I have chairs, tables, and hats. And this
“nature outside” is the nature of physics and biology, although not yet
as discovered in its specific way of being natural. When it is under-
stood by natural science, this entity “nature” has to be understood as
[315] an entity that is always there on hand and that, as something
ever-there, goes through changes always in such and such a way.

So in our original natural experience we see, within the same con-
text of being, both things-of-use that humans have produced out of
natural materials and things-of-nature that humans have not pro-
duced but that have emerged either by growing or by some other pro-
cess. And the whole field that includes both these types of things has
the character of extension and localization. What is more, each of
§25. The question of the unity of nature 259
these things exists either now, or at some time, or usually, or always.
And so we encounter them directly in time. Kant, who did not pri-
marily orient his analysis in this fashion, failed to see that time deter-
mines the things of the environment just as originally as space does.
In his theory, time determines things out there in the environment
only mediately, and it determines them immediately only as the giv-
ens of inner sense (parallel to the way space determines them imme-
diately only as the things of the environment). This thesis of Kant’s is
phenomenologically wrong—it collides with what is immediately
found in the given. And Kant has to accept this state of affairs, despite
his theory, even if he does so after the fact, as when he says that time
is the universal form of the encountered manifold both of outer and of
inner sense. Therefore, from the beginning, spatial and temporal de-
terminateness reside in the known of natural-scientific knowledge,
regardless of what the content of that known may be.

But what is known by natural science—namely, nature—is, insofar
as it is known, something expressed, something determined in propo-
sitions. Whatever this entity nature may be, every statement of this
science already posits and presupposes determinate propositions that
are the basis of (and that are explicitly or implicitly co-asserted in)
every natural-scientific judgment. These propositions are the funda-
mental principles that express what underlies every determinate
change within nature as a change within nature. Laws of nature do
not regulate just this or that specific process in nature. They deter-
mine nature in general as nature. Those propositions are the Analo-
gies of Experience:

[First Analogy:] Principle of the persistence of substance: In all changes
of appearances, substance persists, and its [316] quantum is neither increased
nor diminished in nature. (B 224)

[Second Analogy:] Principle of temporal sequence according to the law
of causality: All alterations occur in accordance with the law of the connec-
tion of cause and effect. (B 232)

[Third Analogy:] Principle of simultaneity, according to the law of in-
teraction, or community: All substances, insofar as they can be perceived
in space as simultaneous, are in thoroughgoing interaction. (B 256)

(I will not go into the question of why Kant calls these principles
“analogies.” )”?

These principles contain determinate basic concepts. For example, in
the Second Analogy—the principle of temporal sequence according to
the law of causality—we find concepts like “cause” and “effect,” or more

72. [See Kant, Reflexionen, no. 4675.]
260 Part II

precisely (and in phenomenological terms), “consequence.” These prin-
ciples express something about nature gua nature, about what goes to
make up nature. They express what is co-thought in every concrete act
of determining nature whenever it is determined. These principles ex-
press something about the basic lawfulness that constitutes nature in
general. Therefore, we cannot arrive at these propositions by way of
experiencing specific processes of nature; rather, all experience of na-
ture already presupposes these propositions, and only on the basis of
these propositions is experience of nature possible in the first place.

That is the reason why Kant (and basically Hume before him) real-
ized in a very acute way the absurdity of trying to get these proposi-
tions from outer experience or (as Kant would say) from experience at
all. Within the known of natural science as such, there reside not only
spatial and temporal determinations but also: (1) other prior determi-
nations that are expressed in propositions qua principles of the type
just mentioned; and (2) propositions and concepts that intend and ex-
press some content-factor of nature; and content-issues that are co-
intended when I deal with specific laws of nature—specific physical,
chemical, magnetic, or acoustic laws. [317] Whenever we think of na-
ture, whether within pre-scientific experience or any other kind of
experience, nature must always already have such content and struc-
ture about it—if phrases like “thinking about nature” and “under-
standing nature” are to make any sense at all. These elements that
belong to the essential content of nature are more or less explicitly
thought in our actual experience of nature. And in science itself these
principles are more or less clearly and completely known—which is a
far cry from saying that they have already been [explicitly] recog-
nized. In every concrete attempt at ordering something, these princi-
ples are already antecedently co-expressed, whether explicitly or not.

What is prior in this sense is the a priori of nature or of the knowl-
edge of nature. But what is a priori must already be operative in the
mind. Now according to Kant, whatever is expressed in the principles
is not given. It is not even given in the way a pure manifoldness in
general (space and time) is given—any more than the concepts of
these principles (e.g., cause and consequence) could be given the way
space and time are. Therefore, as a priori they must be already opera-
tive in the mind, but without being a priori intuitions. The only re-
maining possibility is that these propositions and concepts belong to
the other stem—to the understanding.

It is clear that this should be so. Judgments and concepts have always
been taken as activities specific to the understanding. But how are such
propositions about nature in general supposed to be already operative in
the understanding? The understanding is the faculty of judgment, the
faculty that presents the presented by way of relating and combining.
§25. The question of the unity of nature 261
But how is that understanding supposed to create, as if ex nihilo, con-
cepts and principles that, by what they name and say, intend not an
empty “something” but a very specific entity, namely nature? The venue
of explanation in the present case is not the Aesthetic but the Logic, the
science of the understanding and its activities. Formal logic has to do
simply with thinking about something in general regardless of its con-
tent. It can tell us absolutely nothing about the origin of the concepts
that are necessarily co-thought in the what-is-known of knowledge—
concepts like “cause,” “consequence,” [318] reciprocal action, substance.
These are a priori concepts, and yet they have a content. The same with
the principles (they express something about the content-field of na-
ture). So the question becomes: How are content-oriented statements
about entities possible, when what is expressed in those statements does
not and cannot come from experience and is not taken from the givens
of experience? How can content-oriented statements come from the
pure understanding? How can a statement express something about a
specific entity not by drawing what it expresses from the entity but by
remaining a pure act of understanding, one that does not admit of being
given anything and yet remains object-oriented? That is the meaning of
the question: How are synthetic a priori judgments possible? —i.e., prop-
ositions of the understanding which, without being measured before-
hand against things, are nonetheless in accord with them, i.e., “are
true” (according to B 296). In this way we pose the problem of an ex-
planation of the understanding, one that investigates it in terms of how
a pure action of the understanding can be true, which is the problem of
a “logic of truth” (B 87).

The problem is: How can thinking remain in and with itself in its
action and, in so doing, also be related to objects, i.e., express some-
thing about content in its concepts and propositions? There is no prob-
lem in seeing how Descartes’s position shines through the problem-
atic, viz., where in the first instance it is shown that within the known
of natural-scientific knowledge there is some content with the charac-
ter of being prior: basic concepts and principles. But according to the
theory, this “prior,” the a priori content, resides first of all and funda-
mentally within the subject—which means that the a priori is under-
stood as first of all and fundamentally subjective. And then one asks
how in the final analysis this subjective feature of the understanding
nonetheless can and does relate to objects. Here too we can see (al-
though at a much higher level of the problematic) how Kant remained
imprisoned in this way of posing the question: How does the subject
in its knowledge get out to the object? Kant no longer asks the ques-
tion [319] so primitively, but basically it is the same problematic.

So basic principles and basic concepts are already intended and ex-
pressed beforehand in the known. This gives rise to the first task: as-
262 Part II

certaining what these basic principles and concepts are. But Kant does
not stop there. For him there is the second task, the truly important
one of demonstrating the legitimacy of these basic principles and con-
cepts as activities of the understanding, i.e., as originally present only
in the subject. That means, as Kant puts it, providing them with their
“birth certificate” (B 119) on the basis of which they have objective
validity, i.e., do in fact determine nature as an object.

The first task of demonstration, which consists in ascertaining the
ensemble of basic principles and concepts, is the task of the metaphysi-
cal deduction of the categories. Here Kant shows the following: These
basic concepts arise from the understanding and are concepts of possible
unities that pertain to the ways the understanding can judge. As an act
of combining, every act of judging is a function of unity; and how many
concepts of unities I can produce depends on how many functions of
unity I can demonstrate. These concepts of the forms of unity that are
possible in the judgment are the pure concepts of the understanding, or
the categories. The second task—that of the transcendental deduction—
is the task of proving that these concepts of the understanding are the
conditions of possibility whereby alone we can think something as an
object and as a natural object. Kant’s explanation of the understanding
and its action is quite analogous to the transcendental explanation of
the senses, where of course Kant explains space and time both meta-
physically (i.e., dogmatically) and transcendentally.

In the known of mathematical-physical knowledge—in the entities
that it intends—reside space-time determinations, plus the rules that
are articulated in the principles, plus determinations that express the
basic concepts themselves. Does that exhaust all that always already
resides beforehand in what this knowledge intends? [320] We have set
out everything as regards the given except the decisive thing: that
which is intended in all the principles and categories. The spatio-tem-
porally determined is understood beforehand as the unity of nature
itself. In thinking nature itself we have already priorly thought its
unity, from which every statement about nature is drawn and to which
it returns, whether that statement is a principle or an empirical propo-
sition. This unity—nature—is the most prior of all that resides in the
known as such. The primary a priori of unity—as the underlying
ground that supports a possible togetherness of the manifold, and as
the matrix within which any manifold must be together—must be
concretely determinable as: nature.

Such a unity “constitutes what is essential in any knowledge of the
objects [Objekte] of the senses, i.e., of experience (not merely of the
intuition or sensation of the senses)” (B 218-19). “An object, however,
is that in the concept of which the manifold of a given intuition is
united” (B 137). In Kant’s language, that refers to a prior condition of
§25. The question of the unity of nature 263
possibility which, because it is a priori in the most original sense, must
obviously, already, and most originally reside in the mind. Knowledge,
as we have seen, is comprised of the two stems (sensibility and under-
standing). But the understanding is the faculty of judging—i.e., the
faculty of the function of unity. Ergo, the understanding is what we
were looking for as this condition of the possibility of the unity of the
given manifold. This is an extrinsic way of arguing the point.

Kant looks more precisely into the structure of the understanding
itself. The understanding is certainly the “source of combining,” be-
cause a combination could never come about through the senses and
also could never be contained even in the form of intuition. “All com-
bining is...an action of the understanding” (B 130). Combining
(synthesizing) entails a manifold, but not only that. Combining or
relating requires a pre-view of the basis-on-which this can be com-
bined with that. This “with” requires a “together,” the ovv requires a
év. Combining combines by way of a pre-view of unity. To combine is
to unite, and in [321] all uniting, unity is already antecedently pre-
sented. Transcendental unity “alone is objectively valid” (B 140).

I call your attention to the connection of these observations with
our earlier ones about Aristotle’s position on ovv and €v in relation to
Ov. We have now reached an area where the same issue is in play. In-
sofar as this unity in general makes possible combining and unifica-
tion, it is a constitutive presupposition of every action of the under-
standing. Here again we meet the phenomenon of the pre-view, but
we have to distinguish it from what we set out in the analysis of order.
There it was a question of the pre-view of manifoldness as such, on the
basis of which a given manifold gets understood. Here it is a question
of a pre-view of a unity on the basis of which a manifold is to be com-
bined as this specific manifold.

As regards its structure, combining is the presenting of a unity (qua
basis-on-which) that enables the manifold be thought as a “one thing.”
This synthesis-enabling unity is what Kant, in a striking turn of
phrase, calls a “synthetic unity” (B 130).

The presentation of this unity cannot, therefore, arise from the combina-

tion. Rather, by being added to the presentation of the manifold, it makes

the notion of combination possible in the first place. (B 131)

Therefore, it is not the understanding as combining that constitutes that
unity. Rather, the understanding [gua combining] has need of that
unity. This unity must be able to be given as such if there is to be any
understanding [qua combining] at all. Therefore Kant says that this
unity “itself contains the basis . . . of the possibility of the understand-
ing, even in its logical use” (B 131) of pure combining, where it is not
264 Part II

a matter of combining a concrete, determinate thing.’”* The very no-
tion of combining, in the essence of combination itself, already neces-
sarily entails a pre-viewing of unity.

The next question now is: What is this unity that makes possible
combination as such and therefore the understanding itself? [322] By
answering that question we will arrive at the originary a priori of all
combining, i.e., of all determining. With that we will arrive at the
ultimate a priori of the possibility of determining a manifold as such.
And since a manifold as such is determined by the form of time, we
will arrive at the most originary possibility—that of determining time
as such.”

* * *
§26. The original a priori of all combining—
the transcendental unity of apperception
If we are to demonstrate this unity philosophically as the most original,
this means we have to demonstrate a “transcendental unity” (Transcen-
dental Deduction, §16, B 132), i.e., one that is the a priori condition of
the possibility of the knowledge of nature in general. To comprehend
unity as a priori, i.e., to comprehend it in terms of the understanding and
its action, means understanding it as a unification. To say unity is prior
within the known is correspondingly to say that it is also prior in the
subject. That is, unification is the most original action of the under-
standing—the ur-action of the subject—i.e., as the unifying and com-
bining that makes possible every concrete act of unifying. Combining
entails both a manifold as combinable and the pre-viewing of a unity on
the basis of which the manifold can be together, i.e., be in a unification.

73. [The complete sentence in the Critique of Pure Reason reads: “We must there-
fore seek this unity (as qualitative §12) someplace higher, namely in that which
itself contains the basis of the unity of different concepts in judgments, and hence
[contains the basis] of the possibility of the understanding, even in its logical
use.” In §12, Kant had discussed the traditional transcendentalia (unum, verum,
bonum, etc.) not as supra-categorial predicates of things but as logical requisites for
the cognition of things (B 113-114). He therefore reads unum as the necessary unity
not of the thing out-there but of the concept of the thing out-there. He calls this
transcendental unity “qualitative unity,” in contrast to the quantitative category
“unity” in the Table of Categories (B 95). That transcendental, qualitative unity
lies in the “higher place” that is the transcendental unity of apperception.]

74. [Here (Moser, p. 648) Heidegger ends his lecture of Monday, 8 February
1926, to be followed by that of Wednesday, 10 February (Heidegger did not lecture
on Tuesday), which opened with a 660-word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
§26. The original a priori of all combining 265
As the ur-action of the understanding, combining presupposes the
[prior] presenting of a unity. Therefore, this presenting of a unity is even
more original than any given act of combining. The question now is:
How are we to understand this unity—or better, this most original pre-
senting of unity—as a priori, i.e., as a cogitatio?

We must remember that what is given first of all is the manifold of
the presentations given in inner sense. In these presentations (which
are intuitions) something is presented, i.e., given. In order for there to
be anything known at all [323] in knowledge—i.e., for anything to be a
given—it must be given to me and must be, in some sense, an object “for
me.” The presentation therefore cannot simply flow on, one after the
other. Rather (according to Kant), this presenting (of something) must
be given to me. That is, the presenting must be presentable to me myself
(and this must be a permanent possibility) if what is given in these
presented-to-me presentations is to be accessible to me at all. Knowl-
edge—or the possibility of something being known—necessarily entails
the possibility of the belongs-to-me-ness of whatever is presented. A
knowing entity—in the broadest sense: presenting entities, thinking the
given—must, in its essence, be a presenting of this presenting. Or more
precisely, [knowing entities must be] a presenting of the fact that Iam
currently presenting something as in-being—not as a bare cogitare
[“thinking”], but rather as cogito me cogitare [“I think myself thinking” J,
as Descartes says in his Second Meditation. Kant says as much, almost
word-for-word, in his Logic: “Consciousness {as res cogitans} is really a
presentation that another presentation is in me.””

He does not know just some presenting-of-something. Rather, this
presenting is such that, in carrying it out, I think myself—i.e., “I think
sum cogitans” [“I think the I-am-the-one-who-is-thinking” ]. Every in-
tuition and presentation must be able to be accompanied by this “I
think” (cogito me rem cogitantem [“I think myself as a thing-that-is-
thinking”]), because only in this way is something-given possible at
all as given-for. .. . Every intuition (in the sense of what can be intu-
ited) is necessarily referred to a possible “I think.” Whatever can be
given is referred to a “for.” This phenomenon of the “for”—for me, for
us—is something we should always keep in mind. Kant calls it the

75. Kant, Akademie-Ausgabe, vol. 9, p. 33. [Heidegger’s interpolation is taken
from the Moser transcript (p. 651.30). The text is from “The Jasche Logic,” pub-
lished with Kant’s permission in 1800 by Gottlob Benjamin Jasche (1762-1842) as
Immanuel Kants Logik. Ein Handbuch zu Vorlesungen (K6nigsberg: Friedrich Nicolovius,
1800). This is published in English as Immanuel Kant, Lectures on Logic, trans. and
ed. J. Michael Young (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992). The text Hei-
degger cites is at page 544.31-32 (introduction to chap. 5); Young remarks in his
introduction that “a great deal of the text is attributable to Jasche” (p. xvii).]
266 Part II

being-of-something-“in-me” (B 131).”° Everything that can be given,
that can be intuited (in Kant’s language: every intuition), even the
pure intuition, time—all that is referred to a “for” and only in such a
“for” can it be given at all.

In the first place, this “I think” in which is grounded the belongs-
to-me-ness of presentations, cannot be derived from anything else. It
is an original act of spontaneity. The grasping of oneself in the cogitare,
this act of apprehending the “I am the one who is thinking”—this “I
think” does not mean that my thinking is [324] an activity that just
occurs. Rather, it is an expression of the thought which is the “I am
thinking,” the sum cogitans. In the second place, this “I think” is one
and the same in all consciousness. Only through this relation to the I
that thinks, to the “I am thinking” (i.e., the “I have this presented in
this act of presenting”), can the manifold that is given in such a pre-
senting have a unity. The a priori unity is grounded in this cogito me
cogitare. Kant takes his orientation basically in the direction of Des-
cartes’s position, and maintains that position, but he does not stand
firm on that ground. Instead, he tries to go beyond that position by
asking what it is that makes possible this very belonging-to-me-ness:
“In the same subject in which the manifold is encountered, this mani-
fold has a necessary relation to the ‘I think’” (B 132).”7’ That means:
The subjective, which for Kant is that which is given first, must be able
to be present together with the I (which is the basis of my subjectivity)
in which something is given. In order for this something to be refer-
able to the I, this I must itself be comprehended, and that means: In
having-present the I, the thinking, I also have present, together with
it, that which is given to this thinking, that which is thought by this
thinking. And the given can be given only in such a “having-the-ego-
present qua having-the-given-co-present.”

Therefore, the belonging-to-me-ness of anything is grounded in
this original ability of something to be related to the I, to an I that
must always think of something. This original synthesis within which
alone the given is giveable, combines the given with the I as that which
is comprehendible at every moment in the self-identity of its existence.
This constant self-identity of the I with which the given as such is [a
priori] combined—or this combining wherein the constant self-identity

76. [Also “mir angeh6ren” (B 132-133).]

77. [While retaining the sense of Kant’s sentence, Heidegger drops Also (,,there-
fore“), substitutes dieses (,,this”) for alles (,,all”), and inverts the word order from
,Also hat alles Mannigfaltige der Anschauung eine notwendige Beziehung auf
das ,Ich denke’ in demselben Subjekt, darin dieses Mannigfaltige angetroffen
wird,” to ,In demselben Subjekt, darin das Mannigfaltige angetroffen wird, hat
dieses Mannigfaltige eine notwendige Beziehung auf das: Ich denke.*]
§26. The original a priori of all combining 267
of the I is something that is [a priori] “related-to”— that is what makes
up the original unity of the cogito. This is the original unity present in
the synthesis of the manifold as such with the I that exists insofar as
it is a cogitatio, i.e., a priori—but a unity as pure apperception: a “tran-
scendental unity.” [325]

When we read Kant’s explanation of the pure apperception, we see
clearly how much he struggles to make this issue understandable: this
ultimate structure of the ur-action of understanding qua synthesis.
Nothing might seem be more obvious than that consciousness of
something is at the same time self-consciousness. It might seem that
nothing more could be made of it. But for Kant a further question
arises: What is the ground of the belonging-to-me-ness of the given?

I can only place the manifold presentations next to one other, and
only further unify the unifications themselves (i.e., present an en-
semble of the manifold of presentations) in such a way that, in doing
so, I comprehend myself in each case as the same combining I. But
[this is possible] only on the assumption that there is already given
beforehand the possible togetherness of the given manifold as such as
a whole with the I that thinks a determined manifold. This is the
“ground of the identity of apperception” (B 134). This togetherness of
the given as such with the I is already given beforehand in a prior syn-
thesis in which this original “unity [is] antecedently thought,”
“thought beforehand” (B 133-134, note).

And thus the synthetic unity of apperception is the highest point to which

one must affix all use of the understanding, even the whole of logic and,

after it, transcendental philosophy; indeed this faculty is the understand-
ing itself. (B 134, note)
Therefore, it is the understanding as combining that constitutes the
most original a priori, as we discovered in our general reflection at the
beginning of this treatment, when we called this argumentation “ex-
trinsic.” How is Kant’s explanation different from that?

Kant says that combination entails unity, a unity that is already
presupposed as object of a pre-view. But in the analysis that we just
finished, we saw the exact opposite: It is the original synthesis that
makes up the unity.

The original synthetic unity of self consciousness is: [326] (1) the
originary synthesis which makes unity possible, and (2) the originary
unity which makes synthesis possible. The second is constitutively con-
tained in the first. Synthesis entails the self-positing-in-its-identity on
the part of the I, in fact of the I that thinks, that presents something. As
d priori, unity is a consistent, ever-present character of the cogitatio. It is
the constant self-identity of combining in every act of combining.
268 Part II

Kant calls this unity “qualitative,” in contrast to (cf. B 131) the cate-
gory of unity as the category of quantity. Here “quantity” means “par-
ticularity” and “singularity” which, in the mode of particularity, per-
tains to the forms of pure intuition insofar as there is but a single space
and a single time. Kant determines qualitative unity in connection with
an interpretation of the unum transcendens [the “transcendental one” of
Scholastic thought], according to which we say that omne ens est unum
[“whatever is, is one”]. Such a “unity of the comprehension of the mani-
fold of knowledge” is [simply a] “logical requisite and criterion of the
knowledge of things” (B 114).”? This requirement of unity is a “logical
rule of the agreement of knowledge with itself” (B 116).”? Kant says
“logical”—and that means: it resides in the very structure of under-
standing as a cogito me cogitare.

Of its very essence, the understanding is a combining, but not only
or primarily any specific act of combining. Rather, the understanding
is always an “I combine.” In other words, the combining of a specific
manifold of presentations is possible only as based upon an underlying
“always already having combined the to-be-combined manifold of
presentations with me qua I-combine.”®° And this “already-have-
combined-whatever-will-be-given” (whether the given-in-general or
the given in a specific act of combining) is what constitutes the “for[-
me-ness]” that belongs to the very being of the “I.” The original syn-
thesis that carries out, and posits itself as carrying out, any particular
synthesis—that is a unity, a Uovac, a monad.

The basic question that concerns us is about the connection be-
tween time and the “I think,” and the possibility of that connection.
Our critical discussion with Kant, from which we hope to gain a posi-

78. [Kant asserts that, “These supposedly transcendental predicates of things
[the unum, verum, bonum of medieval philosophy] are nothing other than logical
requisites and criteria of all knowledge of things in general. . . . In all knowledge
of an object [Objekt] there is, namely, unity of the concept, which we may call
qualitative unity insofar as, by means of it, we think only the unity of our compre-
hension of the manifold of our knowledge.” Heidegger, because he is referring to
only one of the scholastic transcendentals, changes Kant’s two plurals (“Er-
fordernisse und Kriterien”) to singulars (“Erfordernis und Kriterium”).]

79. [Here again, Heidegger changes a plural (Regeln) to a singular (Regel).]

80. [“Always already having (done this or that)” is Heidegger’s way of speaking
of what Aristotle calls to ti tyv etvat, the essence of a thing, understood as “what
that thing is a priori” or “what that thing always already is, insofar as it is.” Both in
Aristotle’s Greek and in Heidegger’s German, that notion is (not unproblemati-
cally) expressed as “what the thing already has been insofar as it is,” not in a
chronological but in an ontological sense. Here Heidegger is saying that any spe-
cific act of combining is grounded in the essence of the understanding (in what
the understanding always already is—“has been” —insofar as it is). That essence is
to combine the to-be-combined with the self as a priori combining. ]
§26. The original a priori of all combining 269
tive insight into ur-temporality, concerns time, [327] the “I think,”
and their connection. To get on the right footing for explaining the “I
think” (and to avoid wrestling a ghost) it is important to get clearer on
the meaning of this original act of spontaneity.

If our goal were a detailed interpretation of Kant, we would have to
discuss how the Neo-Kantians interpret apperception. We can leave
that aside here. But just to give you an overview, I might underline the
fact that regarding all the adumbrations of a so-called epistemological
or logical subject (and of consciousness in general), Neo-Kantianism
says that it is a matter of something logical, a mere concept. Of late
they have tried to carry out this epistemological interpretation (which
is pure construction) by connecting it with Scheler’s doctrine of the
person. But putting the two together only increases the confusion and
makes it less possible to understand the simple meaning of transcen-
dental apperception. We should note above all that Kant never dreamed
of determining this I of transcendental apperception, this conscious-
ness in general, as a mere concept.

Kant distinguishes between an empirical and a transcendental
apperception (self-apprehension). Empirical apperception is the intu-
iting, via inner sense, of the manifoldness of presentations as one-
after-another. In empirical intuition gua empirical there are given ap-
pearances and objects (although as scientifically undetermined) as
something mental that is articulated one way or another: as sensation,
as striving, as a pleasing or displeasing impression—that is, a compre-
hension of an objective something-or-other that can be determined as
regards the whatness of its content. But on the other hand, transcen-
dental apperception is, as the name suggests, a self-apprehending, un-
derstood with an eye to the possibility of an a priori knowledge. In
other words, transcendental apperception is itself the most original a
priori of knowledge.

The “I think” is the expressed content of a “merely intellectual pre-
sentation of the self-activity of a thinking subject” (B 278). It is the
expression of a direct comprehension of my self: sum cogitans, | am
thinking. [328]

“T think, therefore Iam” is no inference. (Opus postumum, Akademie vol. 22,

p. 79).§!

81. [Editor’s note: Kant, Akademie-Ausgabe, vol. 22, p. 79.] [Translator‘s note:
The edition Heidegger cited was Kants Opus postumum, ed. Erich Adickes (Berlin:
Reuther & Reichard, 1920). GA 21 cites Opus postumum according to the Akademie-
Ausgabe, vols. 21-22, which was published only in 1936. For an English edition see
Immanuel Kant, Opus Postumum, ed. Eckart Forster, trans. Eckart Forster and Mi-
chael Rosen (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 187.]
270 Part II

This act of apperception (sum cogitans) is not yet a judgment about an
object. (ibid., p. 89).

Of course, the presentation J am, which expresses the consciousness
that can accompany all thinking, is that which immediately includes the
existence of a subject in itself, but not yet any knowledge of it, thus not em-
pirical knowledge, i.e., experience. (B 277)

In this context, Kant’s note in §25 becomes clear:

The “I think” expresses the act of determining my existence. The existence

is thereby already given, but the way in which I am to determine it, i.e.,

the manifold that I am to posit in myself as belonging to it, is not yet

thereby given. (B 157)

What is presented is “only the spontaneity of the act of determining” —
which is the reason “that I call myself an intelligence.” Therefore, in
this apperception my existence qua existence is simply given, but it is
not determined as an object.

The cogito as something expressed, means: “. . . me cogitare; me esse;
sum cogitans” [(I think) “myself as thinking, myself as being, myself as
the one who is thinking” ].* In this self-comprehension, nothing can
be made out as regards its what-content. As original a priori, it always
has the function of giving what it is related to as constant identical
unity, namely: the whole given, determined manifold of knowledge.
Logical consciousness knows no what-content; rather, it knows only
“that Iam” (B 157). This comprehension of the self, when seen in
terms of the determination of the mental, is without content, empty.
It says nothing about how, or as what, I appear to myself, nor does it
say what I am as a thing-in-itself. Even less so does this act provide
any knowledge of my self (B 158), but only of the fact that Iam here:
existence in the sense of being-there-ness. My “existence” is “thereby”
given. Thus Kant says in the Opus postumum:

The consciousness of my self is a logical act .. . (Akademie, vol. 22, p. 69).®4

This is merely a logical act, an act of thought . . . through which no object

is yet given by me. (ibid., p. 79)*

82. [This text is not included among the selections translated in the Forster and
Rosen edition of the Opus postumum.]

83. [“Das cogito als Gesagtes sagt: me cogitare—me esse—sum cogitans.” |

84. [This text is not included among the selections translated in the Forster and
Rosen edition of the Opus postumum.]

85. [Opus postumum, trans. Forster and Rosen, p. 187.14-15.]
§26. The original a priori of all combining 271
In using the word “logical,” Kant means to say: The entity is not intuited
nor given in its “what,” but is posited and comprehended in its existence
merely as data.*° [329] And this cogito me cogitare is an act of spontaneity,
constantly repeatable in self-identity, such that I identify myself as exist-
ing, as in existence, and only to that extent. To say that this act is “logi-
cal” certainly does not mean, “Thinking thinks something that is
thought,” whence one might try to infer the following: “If what it thinks
is a mere thought, something merely logical, then it is a concept; and
therefore the epistemological subject is a mere concept”—as if Kant
would ever have let himself imagine that the highest point to which all
philosophy can be attached—indeed, all transcendental philosophy—is
a mere concept.

This self-positing I, this I that gives itself in its being-present, is the
“logical personality” (Reflexionen, no. 5049).8” But in no way does that
mean that it is “logical” in the sense of something merely thought, and
even further in the sense of a concept. In its self-positing, the I gives
itself as existing. It expresses no “what,” i.e., it attributes no predicate
to itself. Rather, this Lis the subject of a predicate-less pro-position, the
subject of a positing.** That is, the lis a “subject” and only a subject.®?
This subject underlies every proposition and every expression— every
cogitare is a me cogitare:

But for that reason, it is only a subject to which no predicate is attached,

(1) because no subject is thought in regard to it; (2) because it is presup-

position and substratum of other subjects. (Reflexionen, no. 5297)

In this passage we note how Kant gives the concept “subject” a pe-
culiar twofold meaning. In the first sense, the subject is a “grammati-
cal subject” as distinct from a “predicate.” That is what Kant means
when he says the I is a predicate-less subject. However, this predicate-
less subject qua Lis also a “subject” as contrasted with an “object.” The
original synthesis of unity is grounded in this subject and directly
constitutes its being. [330] So the subject is the condition of the pos-
sibility of comprehending any entity insofar as any comprehending of
an entity presumes the co-comprehending of that entity as one.

That is why Kant calls this I that can be comprehended in pure ap-

86.[,...nurals Befund,“ i.e., merely as findings. ]

87. Kant, Akademie-Ausgabe, vol. 18, p. 72.

88. [Heidegger is playing on the connection of Satz (proposition) with Setzung
(positing).]

89. Ich—sum, und zwar Ich—cogitans; Ich, der Verbindende des Verbindens; mein
Mitvorhandens ein jederzeit in allem Verbinden. [Perhaps: “Sum cogitans: I—pre-
cisely as I—am thinking. The I, the one who is the (a priori) combiner in all acts of
combining. My being (is) ever present with and in every act of combining.” ]
272 Part II
perception, simply in its constant and self-identical presence, the “log-
ical personality.” He calls it a “personality” insofar as it is understood
in terms of its original activity, that of the understanding qua combin-
ing as such, the combining of the given with the understanding itself.
We will now explain more precisely how Kant is not (as one might al-
lege) moving in a circle in his analysis of the transcendental unity of
apperception; and we will do so in order then to ask: What is this
original synthesis of the given as such with the I??°

* * *
First of all we need to get rid of a misunderstanding. One might say:
Kant explicitly emphasizes that combining presupposes unity. But
when we ask what the unity underlying this combining might be, the
answer is: synthesis. And what about this synthesis? In any synthesis,
as an act of combining, a unity is antecedently presented. So the syn-
thesis is referred back to a unity. But that unity, in turn, is referred
back to yet another synthesis—and so on ad infinitum. Proceeding that
way, we never get to firm ground; in fact we arrive at the opposite of
what Kant was looking for, viz., the original, the “one” to which ev-
erything else is to be referred.

That objection, however, overlooks an important fact. The synthesis
that Kant calls “original,” the synthesis in which he saw fit to ground
the unity that makes every synthesis possible—and to ground even
this foundational synthesis itself—this original synthesis is not just
any synthesis but a quite exceptional one.

What makes it so exceptional is the fact that one of the things it com-
bines is the I; and the I means: “I think.” Iam that “for” which some-
thing can be given. Insofar as I am, I am that very “for.”*! The I is the
“for-whom-it-is-given” of whatever can be given and thus whatever can
be determined. The “for-whom-it-is-given” (which is I myself) is like-
wise the that-which-determines. To combine something with the I—i.e.,
to let it be with this I??—means that the “something” has the possibility
of being-given-for. . . . [331] This act of combining requires no further

90. [Here (Moser, p. 662) Heidegger ends his lecture of Wednesday, 10 Febru-
ary 1926, to be followed by that of Thursday, 11 February, which opened with a
670-word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]

91. [“Ich bin das seiende Fir selbst.” The selbst here is emphatic (“that very ‘for’
...”), and not reflexive (“the for-itself”).]

92. [This point anticipates what Heidegger will write a few months later in the
manuscript of Being and Time; cf. SZ, p. 201.12-14 / tr. 192.35-37: ,Wenn inner-
weltliches Seiendes mit dem Sein des Daseins entdeckt, das heist zu Verstandnis
gekommen ist, sagen wir, es hat Sinn.” What can be meaningful or meaningless?
Cf. ibid., p. 201 / tr. 193: Only Dasein’s ,eigenes Sein und das mit diesem erschlos-
sene Seiende.” And cf. also SZ, p. 429.35 / tr. 371.35-36: ,Wenn wir sagen: Seien-
§26. The original a priori of all combining 273
pre-view of anything on the basis of which the “combineds” might be
combined into one. Rather, the pre-viewed unity is itself one of the
“combineds.” As [antecedently] brought together with the Las “I think”
(the cogito, the I-place-before-myself in the broadest sense), the pre-
viewed unity requires no further unity. Rather, the “togetherness” that
goes with the act of combining is the very givenness-for-an-“J.””

At the same time, pre-viewing the “I am the one who thinks” (the
ego sum cogitans) is the synthesis, because I as such means “I think,” i.e.,
“T relate myself to the given.” To comprehend the I in its presentness
(as a comprehension of the “I think”) is a co-apprehension of what is
thought in the I’s thinking. That is why Kant insists so emphatically
that the I cannot be given as an object [Objekt] in the sense of an ob-
ject [Gegenstand]; it is not something that I could stay with awhile and
say something about. Instead, comprehending the “I think” means
comprehending the for-whom or for-what. It is to comprehend the
“give-able-for. . .” Comprehending the I means that the comprehend-
ing I carries out the “I think,” carries out the thinking—i.e., the deter-
mining, i.e., the combining of the manifold. For the I to be given in its
pure presentness gua I means for it to “be” the “for,” i.e., it means for
the I to make possible the very give-ability of the given for me.

What makes it difficult to understand these phenomena is the inad-
equacy of the means that Kant had for his effort of understanding them.
For example, the formal structure of the act of combining had to suffice
for determining an entity (the I) that has an entirely unique kind of
being; and then, throughout the entire treatment, the meaning of the
being of this entity is left undetermined—or, what more disastrous, he
understands that being in the simple and direct sense of mere presence.
des ,hat Sinn’, dann bedeutet das, es ist in seinem Sein [which is correlative to ,das
Sein des Daseins’] zuganglich geworden.”]

93. [The argument seems to be: (1) “I think” means “I combine something with
the I that does the combining,” i.e., with the “I-combine.” (2) But “to combine”
means “to bring into unity,” i.e., to bring about the togetherness-in-unity of what is
to be combined. (3) Such bringing-into-unity is unification and as such requires a
unity as the basis on which (or the prior norm whereby) the to-be-combineds are
unified. (4) That unity is not perfect one-ness. Rather, as the prior norm for unify-
ing, that unity means: “unified-with-me-the-unifier,” the one who is, and cannot
exist without, the unification-of-something-with-me. (5) In that sense, the ante-
cedent normative unity is a “must-be-a-unity-such-as-I-am,” and thus indicates not
an absolutely perfect unity but a combined or synthetic unity as is the I qua “I-
combine” or “I-synthesize.”(6) When the to-be-unified is a priori brought together
with the “I-synthesize,” the synthetic unity prescribed by the pre-viewed “unified-
the-way-the-I-is-unified” is a priori effected, and no further unity is required. (7)
“Unified” means Zusammensein—having-been-brought-together-in-unity. As re-
gards what gets unified, its “being-together-with-the-I-unify” is its “being-given-for-
the-I-unify.” (8) Therefore, whatever is combined is ipso facto given-for-the-I.]
274 Part II

Not only does Kant take over Descartes’s position on the cogito sum with
its influence on the meaning of the a priori, but he likewise takes over,
as beyond question, the ontological conception of being as the esse of esse
creatum: as mere being-present, mere happening-to-be. (Right now I
can’t show in detail that Descartes in fact understood the sum in his
cogito sum in this way. [332] I demonstrated that in some earlier lectures
by way of a thoroughgoing interpretation of the Meditations.)*

In the final analysis Kant interprets these structures of the Iand the
“T think” in terms of the co-presence of something-present and an “I.”
However, he likewise interprets the I as something that has..., as
that for which some thing is present. He interprets the I as the con-
stantly self-identical, to whose very presence thinking qua “I think”
can come back at every moment in which a being-present-with is pos-
sible. To put it briefly: Kant tries to interpret the “I think something” —
or in general, the “I have something given”—with ontological deter-
minations that pertain to the “something” that can be given but that
do not pertain to the “I think” and the being of the “I.” He thinks he
can understand the “logical personality” within the formal structures
taken from a form of being that in Kant’s sense is simply the ontologi-
cal opposite of the “I.” He determines the I—which in fact he sees and
understands as the most original and the absolutely unique—by means
of empty, formal ontological determinations.

The original synthesis is characterized by the fact that (1) it is itself the
I's act of relating-to-something, and this relating-to is always an “I have”;
and likewise that (2) by its nature it is the pre-viewing of unity, an act
that is a priori constitutive of the I gua combining. This I—or as Kant
constantly says, the pure apperception—is this original synthesis; or the
[pre-viewed] “unity” is a synthetic unity of the pure apperception.

The original synthesis, which we have interpreted as the phenome-
non of self-apprehension, is the most original in yet another sense: be-
cause it is the basis of every concrete act of combining, each of which,
for its part, requires its own specific pre-viewing or presenting of a
unity. These unities that pertain to the various possible actions of the
understanding as unifications are what we must discover if we are to
show, in the basic statements, what is a priori known in the knowledge
of nature (i.e., what is thought beforehand in the principles). These uni-
ties are the pre-viewed bases-on-which [333] of every act of judgment.
Kant finds them (or believes he finds them) by establishing the possible

94. [Einfiihrung in die phanomenologische Forschung, Heidegger’s first lecture-
course at Marburg, Winter Semester 1923-1924, was published under that title as
GA 17, ed. Friedrich-Wilhelm von Herrmann (Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klos-
termann, 1994; 2d edition, 2006); published in English as Martin Heidegger, In-
troduction to Phenomenological Research, trans. Daniel O. Dahlstrom (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 2005).]
§27. Time as the universal a priori 275
ways of unifying—a “Table of Judgments”—as the possible forms of
combining. He thinks that this Table provides the totality of possible
forms of unity, the possible forms of pre-viewing for these specific ways
of combining. These unities, conceptually grasped as the various possi-
ble pre-viewed bases-on-which of combining, are the categories. With
that, the transcendental, a priori structure of the second stem of knowl-
edge—the understanding—is laid out. The structure of the first stem—
sensibility—was delineated as the forms of intuition, space and time.

Givenness as such is possible only in a “for” that is constituted by an
original synthesis that is expressed as the “I think.” This synthesis is the
condition of the possibility of every concrete act of combining; and (a
priori) transcendentally it is the condition of the possibility of the pri-
mary function of unity, namely, judging as a pure action of the under-
standing. These pure concepts of unity, which pertain to all its ways of
functioning, are supposed to be endowed with a priori content. (They
are, after all, determinations of the content of nature’s being.) Where
does this a priori content come from since, as transcendental, it cannot
be drawn from experience? How can these pure concepts of under-
standing, as unities constitutive of merely empty actions of understand-
ing, have any relation to objects [Objekte], to content-determined ob-
jects [Gegenstdnde|? What is given as essentially a priori, and what is
given universally?—specifically, given in such a way that (1) it is some-
thing given in general for every action of the understanding that is sup-
posed to determine something in the object [Objekt]; and so that (2) this
universal given determines every empirical given in its being-given?

This a priori given, which a priori and universally lies “in front of”
the understanding and which, at the same time, determines every-
thing that can be given to sensibility, is, according to Kant, time. Be-
cause it is a form of the givenness [334] of inner sense, it is a form of
the givenness of that to which an action of the understanding, as an
action of the subject, can first and only direct itself. (The understand-
ing remains “in the subject.”) But then it is not a form of outer sense,
much less a form of those appearances that natural knowledge is sup-
posed to determine. Therefore we must first show how time, which is
primarily and properly the form of inner sense, can also be the form
of outer sense and its givenness, and consequently has to be the a pri-
ori to which, first of all and without exception, every action of the
understanding, as a combining of the given, must be referred.

§27. Time as the universal a priori form of all appearances
To what degree is time, as pure intuition, the universal form of all
givens? How does Kant show that time, although primarily and prop-
erly the form only of inner sense, is also the form of outer sense?
276 Part II

We must keep in mind two propositions: “Time cannot be a deter-
mination of outer appearances” (B 49), and “On the contrary, time
determines the relation of presentations in our inner state” (B 50). So
time is unequivocally denied of outer appearances and attributed to
inner appearances alone. And yet in the second sentence Kant shows
quite precisely that the first sentence holds only in a relative sense. He
says: “Time is an a priori condition of all appearances in general” (B
50); time is “the formal condition . . . of the connection of all presen-
tations” (B 177). But space, on the other hand, is “limited merely to
outer intuitions” (B 50). Kant demolishes the limitations that he pre-
viously and explicitly expressed in the first sentence. How so?

Time is first of all the form of inner sense, i.e., of the presentations
that show up for this sense. As determinations of the mind, these be-
long to our “inner state.” They are cogitationes. [335] The mind is a region
that we “fill up” with cogitationes, with presentations. He says that “the
presentations of outer sense make up the proper material with which we
occupy our mind” (B 67).?? But insofar as we fill our mind with these
presentations—i.e., have them given to us in inner sense—they stand in
the form of time. Even the presenting of the outer sense, as a mental
occurrence, is something that is given in the inner sense; “presentations
in themselves” are inner states, whatever they happen to be presenting.
Insofar as the presentations of the outer senses, as presenting some-
thing, are mental states, they are “in time,” one-after-another—and
they are so “in themselves.” As presenting, they place something before
[us]; and they are presentations in the sense of that-which-is-presented.
Insofar as Kant uses “presentation” in this twofold sense of the “pre-
senting” and the “presented,” he can understand the being-in-time of
the presenting in the same way that he understands the being-in-time
of the presented. Therefore, the outer appearances, as they come to be
the kind of presentations that, according to Kant, are given to inner
sense, are themselves determined as one-after-another: they are deter-
mined in time.

Because all presentations, whether or not they have outer things as their

object, nevertheless as determinations of the mind themselves belong to

the inner state, while this inner state belongs under the formal condition
of inner intuition, and thus of time, so time is an a priori condition of all
appearance in general, and indeed the immediate condition of the inner
intuition ... and thereby also the mediate condition of outer appearances.

If I can say a priori [that is, from out of the subject] that all outer appear-

ances are in space and are determined a priori according to the relations of

95. [The German “das Gemiit besetzen” can have the stronger sense of “to fill
up the mind,” as well as the weaker sense of “to engage the mind.” ]
§27. Time as the universal a priori 277
space, so from the principle [Princip] of inner sense I can say entirely gen-
erally: all appearances in general, i.e., all objects of the senses [all entities
that are encountered], are in time, and necessarily stand in relations of
time. (B 50-51)”°
This is the inferential reason Kant uses to show that time is the uni-
versal form of the givenness of whatever can be determined. [336] As
a consequence, time becomes the first and the only possible a priori
object of acts of pure a priori determining, i.e., of the pure actions of
the understanding. This is why, for Kant, time becomes in a certain
sense the ground from out of which he draws the objectivity of the
pure forms and the empty forms of the unity of the actions of the
understanding.’
From the being-in-time of the mental (the presenting) Kant reasons
inferentially to the being-in-time of the presented. Why does he make
this inference at all? What requires that a time-determination be at-
tributed as well to the appearances of our outer perceptions, i.e., to
outer appearances? Answer: our natural experience, namely, that
they certainly are time-determined. According to Kant’s theory they
cannot be in an immediate way; and therefore he has to show that they
are so “mediately,” by way of inner sense, insofar as they are states of
inner sense. But this way of arguing (1) is phenomenologically un-
necessary (there is no need of it), and (2) is not even conclusive, be-
cause from the fact that the mental occurs in time there follows abso-
lutely nothing about what is presented mentally. On the contrary, if
this way of arguing were legitimate, it would have to follow that even
numbers are “in time,” as well as the objects of geometry (which surely
have nothing to do with natural processes) —and in fact the same with
everything that is thought or presented in any action of the mind: the
categories, the pure concepts of understanding to the degree they are
thought by transcendental philosophy—because this thinking, this
presenting, these “presentations-in-themselves” are themselves also
states of mind. But Kant denies anything of the sort—for example, just

96. [In citing Kant’s text, Heidegger omits two phrases from the text: (1) the
Dagegen (“On the contrary”) that begins the sentence and that indicates the con-
trast between the limitation of space, as pure form, to outer intuition, and the
more general application to time, as pure form, to all appearances; and (2) Kant’s
parenthesized phrase, unserer Seelen—i.e., “(of our souls)”—the omission of which
is indicated by the ellipsis above.]

97. [Here (Moser, p. 675) Heidegger ends his lecture of Thursday, 11 February
1926, to be followed by that of Friday, 12 February, which opened with a 650-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
278 Part II

think of how he crossed out the word zugleich—“at the same time” —in
his interpretation of the principle of contradiction. Or are the acts of
spontaneity exempted from the being-in-time of cogitationes? Are
there, therefore, some cogitationes that are outside of time and some
that are in time? And further, some whose presented content is also in
time, and some whose presented content is not? [337]

Kant never demonstrates that or why this state of affairs is this way;
he simply presupposes it as a fact. But the basis for his argumentation is
the Cartesian presupposition that what is given first and above all is the
act of presenting, and that the only way, the necessary way, to get to
what-is-presented begins with and passes through this act of presenting.
This presupposition also hinders Kant from seeing (1) that the world, the
lived world, is given just as immediately as—no, even more immediately
than—what is given in inner sense, and (2) that we have an equally im-
mediate experience of the one-after-another and the at-the-same-time
in our experience of the lived world. We first experience the one-after-
another in the change of day into night, in the movement of the sun, in
the way things around us change place, and so on. We use the sun to
determine time, and so, the sun is time. Time is the sun, the heavens.
These statements are not poetic fabrications; they express what one sees
first of all—as Plato says: Time is the heavens. From this you can clearly
see that we encounter time first of all precisely in the things given to our
outer senses and that it requires a very artificial attitude in order to see
time the way Kant wants to: as something that is found, from the begin-
ning, purely and exclusively in the one-after-another of presentations.
This position—that time can be experienced even when it is dark, i.e.,
when I see nothing in the world but am referred purely to myself and to
the course of my thinking—this was underlined for the first time by
Aristotle in his treatise on time: time as experienced in the kivnotc of
the soul’s voetv [“in the movement of the soul’s apprehending” ].”°

Kant’s proof of the universality of time cannot be sustained in its
motivation, its presuppositions, or its procedure—but nonetheless its
outcome is incontestable. However, the fact that Kant in the first place
requires and makes use of this proof uncovers the presuppositions be-
hind his position. We must understand and remember how and as
what Kant determines time in the light of this presupposition.

We now understand that time is characterized in two ways. (1)
Time is pure intuition, where the act of intuiting is a determination
carried out by the mind.

Time is simply a subjective condition of our (human) intuition . . . [338] and

outside the subject it is nothing. (B 51)

98. [On sensing time in the dark, see Physics A, 11, 219a4-6.]
§28. Time as original pure self-affection 279

[Time] adheres not to the objects themselves but only to the subject that

intuits ... {the objects? or time?} (B 54)?

Space and time .. . are only in the senses and outside of them have no re-

ality. (B 148)

These remarks, as well as the beginning of §6 of the Transcendental
Aesthetic, make it clear how (as we have already shown) Kant trans-
forms both Newton’s notion of time as a res, and Leibniz’s as an ordo
rerum, into a cogito—a determination of the mind.

(2) We have also encountered a second delineation of time as the
pre-viewed basis-on-which of a specific type of pre-viewing. In this
case, time is given-and-presented as an infinite magnitude. In this
second characterization, time is an infinite whole of the pure mani-
fold of the one-after-another—or, as Kant puts it: time is a quantum.

Our task now is to gather up these new gains and push ahead to a
radical interpretation that will clarify the connection between these
two characterizations.

§28. Time as original pure self-affection
The pure act of intuiting—time!’®°—was interpreted as an antecedent,
unthematic viewing of the pure manifold as such “within which there
is nothing but relations of one-after-another.” This antecedent view-
ing is a way the mind is. It has this pre-viewing from out of its own
self, for the very essence of its kind of being is to have such a pre-view.
But we showed that the object of the pre-view is the very condition

99. [In Kant’s German, the object of “intuits” is sie, which here can mean ei-
ther “them” (the objects) or “it” (time). The Guyer and Wood translation (like the
earlier Norman Kemp Smith translation) opts for the former; Heidegger, after the
word sie, inserts in brackets: “die Gegenstande? Zeit?” ]

100. [In this section, Heidegger’s own understanding of time (which he will
soon spell out more clearly in Being and Time) begins to make its appearance. No
longer a mere natural-cosmic measure of movement, Zeit is now designated as the
self’s most fundamental a priori / ontological “act,” so fundamental that it is the
very being of the self. This antecedent ontological “act” has the reflexive sense of
the self’s “acting upon and affecting itself.” In Being and Time, time will be pre-
sented as the self’s self-generating (sich zeitigend) “temporality,” i.e., human exis-
tence’s finite (and indirectly self-referential) way of being. That being consists in
(1) being open for any encounter (gegenwartig) by (2) living into its own apriority
(gewesende), which is (3) being the ontological basis on which the self can be en-
countered at all, a possibilizing basis-on-which that ever “recedes” (i.e., on prin-
ciple can never be exhausted, only ended by death) while ever “arriving” (zukom-
mende; Zu-kunft) precisely by making encounter possible. ]
280 Part II

whereby anything can be encountered at all. So here time is the con-
dition that makes it possible for anything given to be given in the ar-
ticulated form of one-after-another. The object of the pre-view, then,
is a purely given whole of one-after-another-ness.

By antecedently seeing that object, the mind or self, of itself, pro-
vides itself with the fundamental possibility of being encountered by
[339] anything out there. This pre-viewing, this antecedent, if unthe-
matic, act of having the basis-on-which [something can be received],
is the a priori act of letting something encounter the self. This is the
fundamental way the self is. It is the self’s basic kind of being, whereby
the self, in and of itself, lets itself be encountered by, concerned by, or
in Kant’s terms be affectively modified (sich affizieren) by another, viz.,
the basis-on-which.

This unthematic pre-viewing is the mind’s originary act of affecting
itself—its self-affection. In it the mind relates itself to an infinite given
magnitude: time. Time is the way in which the mind lets itself be given
anything at all. It is the most original, universal form of how-some-
thing-can-be-given; it is the mind’s original, universal self-affection.
As the self’s way of letting itself be concerned about anything, it is the
ontological condition of the possibility of meeting up with anything.

But since this being-affected [Affektion] does not rest on sensation,
i.e., is not a character of any empirical intuition, it must be designated
“pure” self-affection. Intuition as pure intuition (time) is certainly not
an intuitus originarius [originating intuition] in the sense of the intel-
lectus archetypus [the intellect that is the archetype of things], because
the subject does not first create time.'°'It is an intuitus derivativus—that
is, an intuitus originarius that befits a created entity. In this case the
existing subject, as created, has the possibility, arising from itself, to
affect itself with itself and in an entirely original sense. That is why I
say: according to Kant, time is original, universal, pure self-affection.
Up until now, Kant-scholarship has completely overlooked this proper
sense of time—although in one passage Kant does expressly compre-
hend the phenomenon of time in this way.

The upshot of this phenomenological analysis is that time is origi-
nal pure self-affection. And that is no different from what Kant says.
What we have been calling “the act of pre-viewing the basis-on-which”
is what, Kant writes,

101. [Kant defines God’s intuitus originarius as an intuition “through which the
existence of the object [Objekt] of intuition is itself given” (CPR, B 72; cf. B 135,
138-139). Kant contrasts the divine intellectus archetypus and the human intellectus
ectypus in Critique of Judgment, §77 (Akademie-Ausgabe, vol. 5, p. 408). See Critique
of the Power of Judgment, ed. Paul Geyer, trans. Paul Guyer and Eric Matthews
(Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000), p. 277.34.]
§28. Time as original pure self-affection 281

[can] be nothing else than the way the mind is affected by its own activ-

ity—viz., by this positing of its presentation [ihrer Vorstellung] —and hence

affected by itself, which means that as regards its form, it is an inner sense.

(B 67-68)

The original printing of the B edition has the text as above: [the mind
is affected by] “this positing of ihrer Vorstellung,” where Vorstellung
[“presentation”] means Vorstellen [the mind’s act of presenting]. [340]
But later editions emended the text to read “the positing of seiner Vor-
stellung,” a change that is completely unnecessary and robs the sen-
tence of its rich meaning.’ We have to say (1) that the spontaneity of
the self consists in the modes of its act of presenting;'® (2) that the
pre-viewing that we have characterized—namely, time—belongs fun-
damentally to that spontaneity; and (3) consequently that, just as fun-
damentally, spontaneity qua self-affection is receptivity.

Time, understood as this most fundamental self-affection, is “ante-
cedently letting a pre-viewed basis-on-which be given.” This “anteced-
ent letting” is the condition of the possibility of the mind being
occupied with presentations as manifolds antecedently given for com-
bination and determination by the understanding. In self-affection,
time posits for itself the very self as the one who, on the grounds of
this self-concern, can be encountered by something. (“Time gives
what can be determined” [B 158, note]; this giving is, as such, the
actus of my activity.) This positing comes about not through being-
affected. Rather, self-affection—time—is the condition of the possibil-
ity of any and all ability to be affected. In phenomenological terms: it
is the condition of the possibility of being unto an other that we may
encounter.

For Kant, it is the subject and its presentations that are given first of
all; and by passing through them, as it were, we then apprehend and

102. [In his edition, Kritik der reinen Vernuft. Text der Ausgabe 1781 mit Beifiigung
sdmmtlicher Abweichungen der Ausgabe 1787 (Leipzig: Reclam, 1878), Karl Kehrbach
(1846-1905) replaced ihrer with seiner. All current German editions of the first
Critique use ihrer.

Heidegger clarifies this passage in a footnote to Kant and the Problem of Metaphys-
ics, 5th ed., trans. Richard Taft (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997), p.
133 n. 266: “The proposed change of ‘their presentation’ to ‘its presentation’ (des
‘threr Vorstellung’ in ‘seiner’) removes from the text precisely what is essential. The
‘their’ is not supposed to express that the presentation is a presentation by the
mind, but rather that the presenting that is posited by the mind presents the ‘pure
relations’ of the succession of the now-sequence as such and allows them to come
toward receptivity” (translation slightly revised).]

103. [More literally: “. . . the spontaneity of the self is what it is in the modes of
its act of presenting.” |
282 Part II

determine the outer world. The sense of this problematic entails that
this manifold of presentations must itself be given—i.e., we must be
able to be given something. What we said earlier about time as self-
affection must be understood within these limits (“limits” in a Kant-
ian sense). Because Kant unjustifiably restricts time, as a form of intu-
ition, to the inner sense; and because his analysis fails to probe the
structural connections between the prior view, the in-view-of, and
the issue of letting oneself be encountered by a manifold; for these
reasons, even the structural connection that we have laid out—time as
original, universal, pure self-affection—could not come out in the
straightforward, decisive way that its fundamental significance de-
serves. [341]

In this way the double determination of time becomes intelligible:
first of all, as pure intuition and then as an infinite whole of the mani-
foldness of the one-after-another. The prior letting-oneself-be-given
is, in an unthematic way, time. Likewise what that prior letting lets
itself be given is time—which is to say that the subject affects itself
with itself. Here alone, in this interpretation of time as original and
pure self-affection, can we get to the authentic whole of the phenom-
enon of time. The first determinations of time in the Transcendental
Aesthetic (which people usually just rattle off without understanding
the context) are only partial determinations of the whole (viz., time as
self-affection). Time is what lets the pure intuitable be given—and
thereby is the very thing that gets intuited. Thus it is not some object
that is present.

Kant penetrated no further into this dimension of the phenomenon
of time. But de facto he makes the most of this sense of time when he
studies the connection of time and the “I think.” And we must stress
that this fundamental determination of time recedes completely into
the background even while it materially underlies his explanations,
most notably in the major chapters of his treatment of time in the anal-
ogies and the schematism—which is the reason why the commentators
can’t help misunderstanding them. Instead, a different concept of self-
affection emerges in Kant: the understanding as the determining of the
given, and as the very spontaneity of the synthesis. The imagination

exercises an action on the passive subject, whose faculty it {the understand-

ing itself} is. Therefore we rightly say that the inner sense is affected thereby.

(B 153-154)!4

104. [Heidegger may misread this passage slightly. (1) The subject of the sen-
tence is not the imagination but the understanding (der Verstand, B 153). (2) The
synthesis that the understanding performs is the unity of the action (die Einheit
der Handlung) that the understanding itself performs through the imagination’s
§28. Time as original pure self-affection 283

[T]he inner sense is affected by ourselves. Every act of attention can pro-

vide an example of this. (B 156, note)

According to these passages the understanding determines inner sense
as inner intuition. Put otherwise, that which is first given to me in the
synthesis is determined by the understanding as an object. Here “self-
affection” means [342] concern with oneself, i.e., thinking is con-
cerned with the given. Kant points out (at B 152) that the idea of self-
affection necessarily has something paradoxical about it, since
being-affected is different from functioning. The senses are affected
whereas the understanding functions. The understanding is sponta-
neity, whereas sensibility is receptivity. But now spontaneity itself is
supposed to be receptivity, especially so and exclusively so in this phe-
nomenon of self-affection. The self, in its very being, is supposed to be
the condition of the possibility of letting something encounter it.

By interpreting time as the original, universal, pure self-affection,
we have led the heretofore disparate features of time back to an es-
sential phenomenon. But with this phenomenon we have also entered
an area that we had previously started to explore while analyzing the
transcendental apperception—which, as it turned out, was also the
condition of possibility of the “existence” [Kant’s word, Dasein] of ob-
jects: entities as objectively determinable. And this transcendental ap-
perception was itself also an act of spontaneity. This spontaneity of the
I (the self) is thus equiprimordially pure apperception and pure self-
affection, pure “I think” and time. So we are back to the context of
our basic question. Earlier (p. 255) I said: “It is a matter of the condi-
tions of the possibility of a conjunction of time and the ‘I think’,” and,
“Only if we pose the question in this way, i.e., about the conditions of
the possibility of the ontological connection between both determina-
tions of the mind (namely, time as pure intuition and the ‘I think’ as
an act of the mind’s spontaneity), do we comprehend the question
philosophically.” The interpretation of time that we have gained so far
clarifies the connection between time and the I, between self-affec-
tion and transcendental apperception. Or to put it more prudently: It
puts us face to face with the real difficulty. [343]

For Kant there are two self-positings in spontaneity. Kant got to this
dimension by pursuing his inquiries, but he never made it primary in
transcendental synthesis. (3) By way of that action (cf. durch die [d.h. die Synthesis]
er (der Verstand)), the understanding qua active, is able to determine itself qua
passive-receptive inner sense, since the inner sense is in fact a faculty of the un-
derstanding. Thus (4) “The understanding, under the title of a transcendental syn-
thesis of the imagination, exercises that action [of synthesis] on the passive subject,
which is itself a faculty of the understanding. Thus we can rightly say that inner
sense is affected by that action.” ]
284 Part II

his research in a thematic way. Instead, as is his wont, he pursues these
determinations only in a reductive fashion: they remain for him simply
determinations of the mind, cogitationes of the res cogitans, determina-
tions that now pertain to both stems of knowledge: sensibility, atoOnotc,
and the understanding, vonotc. According to Kant, this characteriza-
tion of the res cogitans in terms of spontaneity and receptivity is the
metaphysical or ontological characterization of the subject, whereas the
determination of sensibility and understanding as, respectively, the fac-
ulty of intuition and the faculty of concepts, is the logical characterization
of the subject. Kant makes this distinction in the introduction to his
Logic, §5.'!° Thus, when taken as ontological characteristics, receptivity
and spontaneity determine the subject’s kind of being, whereas when
taken as logical determinates, the faculty of intuiting and the faculty of
combining determine the subject’s comportment. But from the start,
their connection remains unclear. We have to ask: How are these com-
portments—intuiting and combining—grounded in the determinate
being of spontaneity and receptivity? The possibility of both of these
kinds of being of the subject (spontaneity and receptivity) must be de-
termined in terms of this entity’s basic kind of being.!°°

* * *
§29. The question about the connection between time as
original self-affection and the “I think”

Our question now is about the connection between “I think” and
time.'°’ We are looking for the answer via the path we have charted:

105. [The “Jasche logic” in Kant, Akademie-Ausgabe, vol. 9, p. 36/ tr. 546.]

106. [Here (Moser, p. 690) Heidegger ends his lecture of Friday, 12 February
1926, to be followed by that of Monday, 15 February, which opened with a 330-
word summary that is given in part in n. 107.]

107. We are trying to bring together the characteristics of time, trying to make
time comprehensible as a unified phenomenon by way of its diverse and seemingly
disparate determinations. Only from that can we comprehend how the phenome-
non of time comes to have such a central role in the Critique of Pure Reason.

Time is the original, universal, pure self-affection by, or being affected by, it-
self—original because it comes forth from oneself; universal and transcendental be-
cause it is the letting-oneself-be-affected-by . . . that antecedently underlies every
specific act of being-affected-by-this-or-that; pure because time is not determined
empirically-experientially by isolating its component parts, but as a whole—which
likewise means: unthematically, not by way of an objectifying comprehension. It
cannot be comprehended by any objective apprehension. From out of my own self
I let myself be constantly affected by myself and in such a way that what affects
me is not itself observed.

Time is a pure pre-viewing-of . . . Time is what is pre-viewed in the pre-view-
§29. Connection between time and “I think” 285
what role time plays in the fundamental task [345] of Kant’s transcen-
dental investigation. The theme of Kant’s investigation is to clarify
what is a priori known in our knowledge of nature, where “a priori”
means: from out of the original actions of the subject. The mind’s ac-
tions and positings belong to the two stems of knowledge: sensibility
and understanding. Understanding determines sensibility. Our ques-
tion is: In what sense is the universal a priori of sensibility, namely
time, the to-be-determined for the a priori of understanding, namely
the synthetic unity of apperception? How does it look, this a priori,
transcendental, general time-determination that supposedly makes
possible the antecedent concrete scientific experience and study of na-
ture in general? How do we understand “time” in this case? and what
do we mean by a “determination of time”?

At the same time, we need to get a more precise view of such ques-
tions by seeing them within the horizon of the phenomena we brought
out in our phenomenological interpretation of Kant’s problematic. Time
is the condition of the possibility of encountering something at all. As
such a condition, time has the character of an antecedent, unthematic
pre-viewing of the infinite whole, the pure manifoldness of one-after-
another. And this pre-viewing, in turn, has the structure of the sub-
ject’s being-affected-by-itself. Such pre-viewing is the basic form of
[346] “letting something encounter oneself,” a “letting” that is gener-
ated by the pre-viewing itself. From the other side: The “I think” is the
condition of the possibility of the “for whom” the encountered thing
can encounter. As such a condition of possibility, the “I think” has the
character of the most basic pre-viewing, the one that pre-views the con-
stant presence of the self-identical I that something might encounter. As
pre-viewing that constant presence, the pre-viewing is the most basic
synthesis, and its structure is the very structure of the subject’s being.
That being is: “from-out-of-itself-and-unto-itself letting-something-be-
present-with itself, the subject, as the constant for-whom.”

Both of them, time and the I, are what is pre-viewed in a pre-view-
ing, and both are unthematic. Time is not perceivable as an empirical
object, and the I is not an object that can be determined by way of
predicates. Instead, both time and the IJ are the prior, unavoidable pre-
viewed of the unthematic pre-view that goes with any concrete act of
knowledge. Both are originary modes of being of the subject. In this
phenomenological characterization, time and the “I think” lose their
ing. Time qua time is given so unthematically that, precisely by being so given,
time is the condition of the possibility of relating to entities.

In a certain way Kant sees this character of time; but time nonetheless remains
basically undetermined and not valorized—something that is bound up with the
undetermined-ness of spontaneity’s kind of being.
286 Part II

“disparate” character that they have at first glance and that they have
had for Kant and the tradition both before and after him. Instead, the
possibility of showing the phenomenological connection between the
two grows more promising.

But how are we to understand the connection? Is time a mode of
the “I think”? Or is the “I think” a mode of time? Or are both of them
modes of an even more original connection? Our final position on
Kant’s conception of time will necessarily lie in our answer to this
question. We should not present our response as simply a counter-
thesis to Kant’s conception of time. Instead we must show, on the basis
of the interpretation we have carried out thus far, that the radical con-
ception of the relevant connection of the phenomena that Kant treats
requires the answer that we give.

Can we, using Kant’s work itself, get an understanding of how
Kant determines this relation between transcendental apperception
and time? He determines this relation—certainly not by [347] ex-
pressly asking about and searching for an answer, but nonetheless he
does make use of it. And how does he make use of it? Once in his
doctrine of the schematism of the pure concepts of understanding, and
then again in his proof of the analogies of experience. From the way
Kant makes use of the relation of time and transcendental appercep-
tion in these texts, we should be able to gather how he understands
time. Only by pursuing these considerations and demonstrations with
the intention of seeing how time is thereby understood, will we have
the opportunity to complete our understanding of how Kant charac-
terizes time. Only in this way, can we ask and answer the critical
phenomenological question about the relation of time and the “I.”
But that will mean nothing less than a concrete characterization of
the problematic of ur-temporality in contradistinction to Kant’s inter-
pretation of time. And it will be the interpretation of that same ur-
temporality within the task of a clarification of the scientific knowl-
edge of entities.

§30. Interpretation of the First Analogy of Experience in
the light of our interpretation of time
We begin with a phenomenological treatment of the analogies of ex-
perience, and in fact we limit ourselves to the discussion of the First
Analogy. Kant says in a general way: The analogies

exhibit the unity of nature in the combination of all appearances under

certain exponents, which express nothing other than the relation of time

(insofar as it comprehends all existence in itself) to the unity of appercep-
§30. First Analogy of Experience 287

tion, which can obtain only in a synthesis in accordance with rules. (B

263) 198
Every determination of nature, as a synthesis, is grounded in the orig-
inal synthesis of apperception. But insofar as it is a determination of
appearances that are encountered in time, every determination of na-
ture is a determination of the being-in-time of nature, [348] and thus
a determination of time. If it is to determine objects, the synthesis is
bound to a view of time in general. The rules of the synthesis are co-
determined in terms of time. A synthesis is essentially a determina-
tion of time; and, as a synthesis of the scientific knowledge of nature,
it is a determination of the objective being-in-time.

But what does it mean to “determine time”? We first ask: What
does an empirical determination of time require? And secondly: What
does an objective-scientific determination of time require? We shall
take the explanation only as far as is necessary to interpret the First
Analogy and the schematism.

Time (that is, the time wherein the data appear) is to be determined
empirically. We start with the way in which time is first given in
Kant’s sense, and then analyze these modes of the givenness of time.
We are not saying that this mode of time-givenness is the primary
mode within natural experience. It is primary only on the basis of
Kant’s starting point. For Kant, what is first given is the manifold of
presentations in inner sense. If I behave purely passively—i.e., if I just
let that manifold be given to me—then one can see that the “presenta-
tions” are given in [the form of] pure change: There is the beginning of
something and the end of it: this, that, and the next thing. What is
present only for a while changes, and in its place comes something
else—now this, now that, a pure perception of what is present. There
is only change (never a one-after-the-other succession) as long as I
abandon myself simply and directly to whatever is present—in which
case I let myself be simply taken prisoner by what is present, without
following it toward its disappearance or looking at what might come
after it. I cannot determine this pure change temporally; or more ex-
actly: as given over to this pure change, I do not comport myself in a
time-determining way.

I do that only when I consider the time-character of what is cur-
rently present and changing, and say “now.” But even when I do that,
I could just say “now, now.” Only when I take hold of the time-char-
acter of the [349] self-repeating changing things, only then is there
ever a now. But if I also try somehow to determine this “now” and

108. [CPR, p. 320.]
288 Part II
understand it as this “now,” then I say: “Now, when this and that is
present,” or “Now, when this and that appear.” Every determination of
“now” says, in no matter how vague a way: “Now, when this or that
happens.” In every “now” I determine that “now” with regard to some
thing that is there, some thing that is also and always already on hand.
“Now, when this or that exists”—the “this or that” which I regard as
there in my determination of time, is a something just-there that is
surely accessible to me—to me in this now and not to some other I in
another now. If I want to communicate this determinate “now” in its
content—this “now” as I have determined it purely for and from out of
myself—this now-determination would not be a now-determination
for someone else. Now, right when the knife falls off the table, I feel
pain. But when communicated, this now-determination (“now that
the knife is falling”) is, in the event (for we must maintain Kant’s hy-
pothesis of the isolated subject), a time-determination that says noth-
ing to someone else, because even if he had until doomsday, he could
never figure out the “when” of when-the-knife-fell. In fact, in a strict
sense this “when” says nothing even for me once I recall that I am
simply maintaining the attitude of pure perception that was charac-
terized above. The now-determination says something simply and
only about the current “now.” But suppose that this now-determina-
tion (“now, when the knife falls from the table”) should encounter in
the pure change of presentations, so that it were something that, in
my abandonment to change, I have and understand as given to me. In
that case this “now, when the knife falls” would not be a “now” at all,
because the “now” is perhaps “now, when the clock strikes the hour.”
Every time I say “now,” I am always already directed to something
on hand—that is a necessary condition for every time-determination,
but not a sufficient condition for an objective time-determination. In
order for an objective time-determination to be possible, that to which
I must always come back as already on hand, must itself be something
to which I can constantly come back as being the same [350] and,
what is more, as something to which everyone can come back at any
time. The thing on hand must itself be ever on hand. In our social co-
existence, a time-indication that goes back to something present
(“Now, when the knife is falling from the table”) can indeed mean
something for whatever entities are right there with me in the same
lived world, but it says nothing to other people who aren’t. On the
contrary, “Now, when the sun is at its zenith, the knife falls from the
table” — that, within certain limits, is an objective determination.
Even with this, to be sure, the “now” has not yet been sufficiently
determined. The important thing is only this: At all times and in every
“now,” I and the others for whom time is to be determined must be
able to come back to that “now.” This means: The “now”—which the I
§30. First Analogy of Experience 289
always says, and which is to be objectively determinable—is essen-
tially a “now” for which the current concretion of the I is irrelevant.
The now is essentially a possible now-there-for-any-I—but which con-
crete I, as well as which specific “now,” is indifferent.

Consequently, that which I must be able to come back to is charac-
terized as “any-now-at-all” and “any-I-at-all.” The only thing that is
necessary is the unity of the original synthesis “at every time” (B 220).
The “now” is somehow an I-related “now.” But again, if an objective
time-determination is to be possible, for this “now” and every “now”
there must always and ever be something underlying, for all intents
and purposes a substratum or a subjectum, “the everlasting existence of
the proper subject in the appearances” (B 228).'° This subjectum that
already underlies every “now”—and underlies even more so every
[pure] manifold of nows and every one-after-another and every at-
the-same-time—this subjectum is time itself. (Compare: Every deter-
minate time is part of all time.)

e “All appearances are in time, in which alone, as substratum (as
persistent form of inner intuition), both simultaneity as well as suc-
cession can be presented. The time, therefore, in which all change of
appearances is to be thought, lasts and does not change.” (B
224-225)

e “For change does not affect time itself, [351] but only the appear-
ances in time.” (B 226)

e “Time itself does not elapse, but the existence of that which is
changeable elapses init...

e [Time] is itself unchangeable and lasting.” (B 183)

Time as a whole is what I must come back to as everlasting persis-

tence—except that I cannot come back to it, because:

e “Time itself cannot be perceived.” (B 219)

e “Time cannot be perceived for itself.” (B 225)

e “Time cannot be perceived in itself.” (B 226)

e “For an empty time that would precede is not an object of percep-
tion.” (B 231)

e “Time [is] not an object ...by means of which {as if it were itself
an appearance,} appearances could be held together {in a synthe-
sis}.” (B 262)!!°

109. [Heidegger changes Kant’s genitive (“the principle... of the everlasting
existence”) into a nominative.]

110. [Without Heidegger’s ellipsis or bracketed additions: “absolute time is not
an object of perception by means of which appearances could be held together.” ]
290 Part II

In other words: Time is not something present out-there. It is not
something that can be empirically intuited. But that means that time in
itself is not determinable. I cannot determine any “now” in an absolute
way by way of the pure pre-view of the whole of time, because any de-
terminate “now” always already bespeaks a “now, when. . .” Every
now-determination is essentially relative to some present thing; and
only to the degree that this present thing (with regard to which time is
determinable at all) can be fixed, is a determination of time possible.

By the way, Einstein arrived at this same framework for determin-
ing time by pursuing some quite specific, concrete problems in phys-
ics. The principle of the theory of relativity—that all time is the time of
a certain place—is a principle that is grounded in the very essence of
time, insofar as what is present in the sense of being present in nature
can be determined only place-wise—i.e., only in terms of a place and
relative to a place. There is no absolute perception of time. In a certain
sense, as regards something present in nature, I can never simply and
directly fix its “now” as given absolutely. Instead, the now is always a
“now, when .. .”

Time itself as a whole cannot be perceived, i.e., is not empirically
intuitable as something present. Nonetheless time does show up as
something given, and in such a way that what gives it [352] remains
hidden. Then how is a time-determination of time to be possible if
every determining of time, every saying of “now,” is a matter of com-
ing back to something present—while that present something is not
itself accessible in any absolute way? Kant now says: /f time as such is
to be determinable, and if in that process time as a whole cannot be
comprehended as that to which I come back and from out of which I
somehow determine an absolute now-position—then in the appear-
ances themselves one must be able to find antecedently a substratum
that presents time. There must be something “that always exists, i.e.,
something /asting and persisting” (B 225). And what exists in this way
is substance. Time is presented—it is rendered sensible—in substance
as persistence. As we will show later, time is the schema of substance:
time qua persistence presents a rule for determining natural entities as
substances. (Substance cannot be intuited any more than time can.
Persistence is the rule for rendering something sensible.) The intuition
time is the pre-viewed basis-on-which of pure intuition, and as so pre-
viewed, time cannot be determined, i.e., cannot be directly compre-
hended in any synthesis. But to the degree that it is determined, it is
determined through a synthesis that, as such, undergirds a rule.
Therefore, even though a direct determination of time is intrinsically
necessary but essentially impossible, there is a path that we can take
via a rule of the understanding—one that, as a rule of the understand-
ing, is antecedently indicated by the “I think” and its original unity.
§30. First Analogy of Experience 291
This is the way time as the persistent is presented in the principle of
the First Analogy: “In all change of appearances substance persists”
(B 224).

If a time-determination is to be possible at all, this principle is the a
priori condition that rules and renders determinable all time-relations.
It is born of the necessity of rendering a determination of time a priori
possible as regards the unity of the transcendental apperception, since
time itself is a priori not perceivable. This principle stands “at the head
of the pure and completely a priori laws of [353] nature” (B 227). It is
the principle that expresses the conditions of the possibility of the ob-
jectively determinable being-in-time of nature. It establishes a priori
how any entity-that-is-in-time must be at each moment ff it is to be
determinable, in accordance with its objective being-in-time, as this
entity that is in time at every moment. As the principle of “existence
in time,” it expresses a general time-determination, i.e., a rule of time-
relations as such. In this case it expresses the fact that something
which persists must underlie all one-after-another and at-the-same-
time. Only by way of this permanent something is existence endowed,
in the various parts of time, with a magnitude, in the sense of quanti-
tas, a magnitude that we call “duration.” As Kant says, duration is the
“magnitude of existence” (B 262), the magnitude of presence—i.e.,
the measure of “how long,” from when to when. And every “when” is
determinable by a “then,” and this “then” is a “now.” The determina-
tion of the now, of the how-long, and of duration are possibly only on
the basis of this something-persistent.

If an objective knowledge of nature is to be possible, the unity of
the transcendental apperception requires that there be something that
persists. You see that, given this observation, new determinations of
time emerge. Likewise it already becomes clear how time functions in
a specific way (to put it roughly) in the transcendental apperception’s
movement toward or transcending to the world. For Kant’s original
Cartesian position itself requires that the a priori necessary conditions
of this movement must be exhibited; and this movement itself, in its
necessity, is nothing else that the whole of the presuppositions that
underlie every empirical time-determination and time-reckoning. In
every indication of time there reside the principles formulated in the
analogies, and primarily the principle of the First Analogy, “In all
change of appearances substance persists”—a principle that is not got-
ten from, but rather underlies, all empirical experience."

111. [Here (Moser, p. 705) Heidegger ends his lecture of Monday, 15 February
1926, to be followed by that of Tuesday, 16 February, which opened with a 700-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
292 Part II
Why-—i.e., with what legitimacy [354] and necessity—is this principle
required for the being of nature such as it confronts us?

As we derive this principle of persistence in connection with the ne-
cessity of an inter-subjective time-determination, a new and essential
feature of time emerges: time is persistence. As Kant says, “Persistence
gives general expression to time as the constant correlate of all existence
of appearances, all change and all accompaniment” (B 300).'!* Persis-
tence is the condition of the possibility of one-after-another and of at-
the-same-time. If the time-relation is determined as at-the-same-time,
then time is understood as a sum-total. When taken in the relation of
one-after-another, time is understood as a series. If I determine time
(the time-relation) primarily as duration, then time is understood as a
magnitude. Magnitude, series, and sum-total are the essential view-
points within which time necessarily must be able to be placed in every
time-determination as a time-reckoning. And from this necessity, in
turn, the three analogies are then derived, corresponding to the view-
points of magnitude, of series, and of sum-total, respectively.

I have already explained that in this derivation of the analogies
nothing is said directly about the connection of time with the “I
think.” Nonetheless, we can see here a trait in common between time
and the “I think.” Even though it cannot be perceived, time as the
persistent is, as such, the underlying—i.e., it is the subjectum in the
strict sense in which Kant himself uses the concept subjectum,
vuTokeiuevov. But Kant has also already characterized the “I think” —
which can be constantly identified as the self-same—as subjectum in
this sense. The Lis the subjectum not so much in the sense of the “sub-
jectivity” of the I in the sense of an ego. Rather, it is the subjectum in
the sense of “the underlying” that has no predicate.

Accordingly, time is the subject’s “persistent” self-affection; it is that
which originally and constantly affects; and it is that to which every [355]
time-determination as a synthesis of the “I think” must come back, but to
which it cannot come back [fully], so that the subject, as necessary and
persistent, determines the substance of nature itself—in fact anteced-
ently—with regard to time and in relation to apperception. This a priori
determination is a principle. Given the constant self-identity of the 1 itself,
the relation to the time-determining “I think” must be a constant relation
in the sense that it constantly comes back to the same subjectum. This par-
ticular connection between the persistence of time and the necessity of a
rule for determining time is something that Kant makes a remarkable use

112. [The Guyer and Wood footnote to this passage comments that “accompani-
ment” (Begleitung) connotes “the accompaniment of one state of affairs by an-
other, i.e., what Kant is here otherwise calling ‘simultaneity’ or coexistence”
(CPR, p. 300).]
§30. First Analogy of Experience 293

of in the brief section that bears the title “Refutation of Idealism” (B 274-
275), to which, in the preface to the B edition, he added a correction (B
xxxix-xli). Kant says: Iam empirically aware of my presence, namely in
the first place in the sense of the flow of presentations. My presence is a
being-present in time. But the one-after-another of presentations is pos-
sible, as one-after-another, only on the basis of something permanent
that is independent of this one-after-another. Insofar as this one-after-
another is the inner one-after-another of my presentations; and granted
the necessity that there be something permanent that is independent of
the one-after-another—on these conditions, it is also necessary that there
be given the presence of a [realm of] outer being: something permanent
outside of me. The presence of this something-permanent—the world—is
necessarily included in the determination of my own existence as within-
time, and forms a single experience with it. This experience of myself,
Kant says, as the pure one-after-another of presentations, would not re-
ally take place unless there were at the same time something external,
something permanent. Indeed, he says:

The “How?” of this {connection} can no more be explained than we can

explain further how we think at all of what abides in time, whose simulta-

neity [356] with what changes gives rise to the concept of change. (B xli)

This reflection, which constitutes the kernel of the “Refutation of
Idealism” in Kant’s sense, gives expression to the aforementioned con-
nection of time and permanence. The function of time becomes clear
here: What is present first of all is an empirically given existence; this
something-present presupposes within itself as pure change and one-
after-another, that there is something present that is permanent,
something that abides and does not change in time: the world of
things, or nature in the broad sense. Or if we begin from the side of
nature and the world: In nature, taken as something that abides,
within its whole field, there is a region of happenings—viz., the pure
one-after-another of my presentations—that likewise have the pecu-
liar feature of being accessible to me, from which we can conclude that
there must be present something permanent as the ontological condi-
tion of the one-after-another. With this, Kant claims to have carried
out, from out of and by way of the concept of time, a strict and neces-
sary proof of the presence of the outside world. We must keep clearly
in mind the point of departure of this proof—which is the pure pres-
ence of a one-after-another whose kind of being is not different from
the kind of being of the what-is-permanent, which consequently is
shown to be the world as what-is-permanent.

Therefore, time is the phenomenon with relation to which the pres-
ence of nature is demonstrated to be co-present with the empirical I.
294 Part II

Here time is used for a fundamental statement about the presence of the
world and of the empirical I—or more precisely, for a statement about
the necessary co-presence of the one with the other. Stated as a princi-
ple: Time co-functions in the clarification of how something present is
able to be determined. It is the “constant correlate of all existence {i.e.,
presence} of appearances.” Thanks to time’s a priori relation to the unity
of apperception, Kant now arrives at these fundamental principles: the
analogies [357] that he says have a regulative character. This means
that they a priori regulate the various ways of determining—the various
syntheses of the relations of—whatever exists in time.

The understanding is the faculty that brings about comprehension.
The fact that we comprehend anything at all is due to the understand-
ing as a combining. But the determinateness of everything determin-
able is the determinateness of the a priori form of everything determin-
able—i.e., of everything given—and that a priori form is time. Therefore,
time co-functions in constituting the understanding of anything at all;
that is, it co-functions in the constitution of meaning. Time co-func-
tions in and for constituting the possibility of pure concepts of the un-
derstanding relating to the given objects and, in this relating, intending
some meaningful content, intending some thing—that is, the possibility
of the pure concepts having present a meaning, a sense.

From the fact that time co-functions to constitute understanding in
general, in connection with the determining of the determinable, we
come to what seems to be a new structural connection between time
and the “I think,” but which in fact is the same connection we already
discovered in the First Analogy. How time is connected with and func-
tions in the formation of an understanding in general is what Kant
discusses under the rubric, “The Schematism of the Pure Concepts of
the Understanding.”

§31. The schematism of the pure concepts
of the understanding
In the Critique of Pure Reason, the section of the investigation that bears
the title “On the Schematism of the Pure Concepts of Understanding”
is the one in which the function of time and its connection with the “I
think” are thematized in a properly concrete way, but in the same way
that we have already pointed out: by making use of some kind of con-
nection while leaving it entirely undetermined.

This chapter [358] on the schematism is the real center of the Critique
of Pure Reason. The whole structure of the book stands or falls with the
doctrine of the schematism of the pure concepts of the understanding
and with the sustainability of this doctrine. However, current Kant-
§31. The schematism of the pure concepts 295
scholarship is of the opposite opinion. It has simply passed over this
chapter on schematism as baroque and obscure, thinking that one can
get on with an interpretation of the Critique of Pure Reason without this
truly central item. Even [Erick] Adickes, a scholar who has earned great
esteem for his scholarly interpretation, remarks in his edition of the
Critique: “In my view, we should not attribute any scientific value to the
section on schematism, since it was inserted quite late in the ‘brief out-
line’ for systematic reasons” (1889, p. 171 n.).'!? But even if one empha-
sizes the fundamental significance that the schematism has for the Cri-
tique of Pure Reason, nothing is gained by sucha blind, dogmatic insistence
on the importance of the schematism. Instead, we must gain an under-
standing of the phenomena that Kant hit upon under this rubric but
that he in no way mastered.

By clarifying what Kant means by this schematism we will get,
retrospectively, a clearer understanding of the context that he presup-
posed in the analogies. The “I think” of the original synthesis anteced-
ently thinks “unity.” Every possible a priori unity of combinability in
accordance with the pure forms of combining, gua unity, is what
guides the determinability of a manifold of the given, and therefore is
necessarily related to time as the form of the given as such. Accord-
ingly, time is that wherein the a priori actions of the understanding
can be a priori rendered sensible—or as Kant once put it: can be given
a “sense,” i.e., be related to objects and thereby be determined to a
certain content.

The question is: How can a pure concept of the understanding,
which in and of itself merely expresses the pure condition of an act
[359] of the understanding as such, be related to appearances—i.e., to
something that, on its side, is given from out of itself to the under-
standing? How can it be related to appearances in such a way that it
asserts something about the appearance—i.e., something regarding its
content, something that belongs to its content not just occasionally but
necessarily? The issue is not about how it happens that, now and
again, given the right occasion, I apply the correct category and form
to some stuff that is given. That is, it is not about how, when con-
fronted with a manifold of sensations, I am able to choose the fitting
and right category with which to clothe the given stuff. Kant quite
correctly never posed such a question. Instead, what he asks about is
something that is fundamental to his Cartesian position: How is it at
all possible for pure understanding, from out of itself, to determine
something that must necessarily be given to it? In demonstrating this
a priori possibility, one proves a priori the possibility that the pure con-

113. [Guyer and Wood provide historical and textual clarification of this point
(CPR, p. 728 n. 51).]
296 Part II
cepts of the understanding can relate to appearances—one proves the
possibility of their objective validity.

The general condition of a possible applicability of a category to ob-
jects consists in the fact that the category as such and in general must
contain in itself, a priori, something sensible. But this something-sen-
sible, insofar as it is a priori necessary for the objectivity of the category,
is at the same time that which restricts the applicability of the category
to sensibility, to appearances in general. This condition—the some-
thing-sensible that a category must be able to have—is what Kant calls
the schema of the categories, the schema of the pure concepts of the
understanding.

To understand that, let us first ask: What does a “schema of a con-
cept” mean in general? And even before that: What does “schema”
mean? Kant distinguishes (although not always or in all respects rig-
orously) between “schema” and “image.” In this context, let us ask
more concretely about the difference between the two, and about the
difference between “image,” “depiction,” and “schema” (or “schema-
tizing”). [360] As regards this present consideration and the earlier
ones, let me say: I am lecturing not about Kant but about Jogic. And
just as the earlier phenomenological interpretations of synthesis clari-
fied the basic structures of the possibility of the judgment, so now, our
explanation of the schematism will discuss phenomenologically the
basic structures of the possibility of concepts in general.

But how can we bring together image and schema, depiction and
schematizing, for the purpose of working out their differences? How
do they differ from each other, and how do they belong together?

Image and schema are intuitables [Anschauliches] that can be pro-
duced in such a way that, as intuitable, they portray something they
themselves are not. They let the thing be seen or understood in different
ways according to the case: depictions in intuitables; and sensibiliza-
tions.''* Sensibilizations differ from acts of intuition [Anschauungen],
and portrayals [Darstellendes] differ from intuitables [Auschaunbarem|
insofar as the intuitable can be directly grasped, that is, it gets intuited
only as itself. Grasping and understanding a depiction (i.e., what's
grasped: the portrayal or image of something) must necessarily, primar-
ily, and thematically grasp, comprehend, and (in the broadest sense)
understand what is getting depicted.

We said, “to be seen or to be understood.” We made this distinction
with a view to whether the depiction itself is sensibly intuitable or
whether what is to be depicted qua sensibilized is, of its essence, not
sensibly intuitable. (Kant calls the latter case the sensibilization of con-
cepts.) This distinction between the [sensible] portrayal of a [sensibly]

114. [That is, they make something be “related-to-the-sensible.” ]
§31. The schematism of the pure concepts 297
intuited and the sensible portrayal of something that essentially can-
not be depicted, seems to be clear, but on closer inspection it is inad-
equate. Nonetheless, we will begin with this distinction and will ex-
plain, in order, four different modes of sensibilization:

1. Sensibilization of appearances, [361] i.e., of empirically intuitable

objects.
2. Sensibilization of sensible concepts, i.e., empirical concepts.
3. Sensibilization of pure sensible concepts.
A. Sensibilization of the pure concepts of the understanding.
In the fourth sensibilization, the theme of our interpretation is noth-
ing other than the transcendental schematization, the transcendental
schema that Kant understands as time, or better, as the transcenden-
tal determination of time (B 178).!°

a) Sensibilization of appearances

The sensibilization of appearances happens as the simple depiction, in
an image, of some specific object of experience. This is an image-as-
copy [Abbild] of something in the strong sense of the term: a facsimile,
a reproduction of a specific thing-out-there in an image that is painted,
drawn, or produced in some other way, such as in a photograph, which
is a simple copy of something that is visible in [natural] light or under
illumination. The photograph is accessible through intuition: it shows
me a specific—and in fact only one specific—visible object: this house,
this dog, this tree. I can never photograph either “house in general,”
i.e., the whole of what belongs to a house, or the way “house in gen-
eral” belongs to this particular house. I always photograph only houses.
The image, as Kant correctly says, has “as its aim... [an] individual
intuition” (B 179),!'°i.e., it always depicts an individual this-here.

An example of one specific kind of image-as-copy is a death-mask.
(I will not go into the mask in general as a phenomenon of depiction.)
The image-as-copy—the death-mask—can itself be further copied,
drawn, or photographed. In the photograph of the image-as-copy [i.e.,

115. [The text Heidegger alludes to is presumably, “an application of the category
to appearances becomes possible by means of the transcendental time-determina-
tion.” (CPR, p. 272).]

116. [Kant’s sentence at B 179 focuses on the schema as a product of the imagi-
nation, in contrast to just any sense-image. Heidegger’s citation, however, takes
from that sentence only what applies, by implication, to a sense-image. Cf. CPR, p.
273: “The schema is, in itself, always and only a product of the imagination. But
in this case the aim of the imagination’s synthesis is not an individual intuition
but only unity in the determination of sensibility. Thus a schema is to be distin-
guished from an image.” ]
298 Part II

the death-mask] I can directly see the thing that is primarily intended
and depicted: the countenance of the dead person and thus the dead
person himself. The countenance being depicted is directly visible in
this [photographic] image-as-copy. And what is depicted, the depicted
content [namely, the countenance], the content that appears in the
photograph of the death-mask, leads us back (as we say) directly and
exclusively to [362] what is being depicted, which is always a [single]
this-here.

However, the specific thing being [photographically] depicted, that
which I see in the [photographic] image—namely, this death-mask—
could also be used as a determinate depiction of a concept. In that case
the image, the [photographed] death-mask, now shows how a death-
mask as such looks. That is, the photographic copy is used as an exem-
plary illustration of the sensible concept “death-mask.” In this case, it
is the concept “death-mask” that gets depicted. The “aim” of the depic-
tion is now “the unity in the determination of sensibility” (B 179), i.e.,
to show how this one determinate “whatness” (namely, “death-mask”)
“looks” in distinction to every other thing.

That notwithstanding, the genuine meaning of a photographic image
is not “illustrative example [of a concept]” and never can be.''” What
the photographic depiction depicts, is the face of a specific dead
person—Pascal, for example—and not one particular case of “Pascal”
as an illustrative example of the concept “Pascal-ness.” Nonetheless,
what we find emerging here is a notion of “image” that differs from
the notion of image-as-copy and yet goes together with it as an
“image-of.” How that is so, we shall see in what follows.!"8

* * *
b) Sensibilization of empirical sensible concepts

We have named the second kind of sensibilization as “the sensibiliza-
tion of an empirical sensible concept.” To some degree we have al-
ready characterized this kind of image in what we have just said,
namely: The goal of the depicted now aims at the general essence
“mask” or “photograph” or the general essence of any other sensible
thing (“house,” “dog,” “table,” and so on). But the depicted is always
and necessarily an individual “this.” When I depict the concept “house”
in a sensible form, I must necessarily draw or paint a specific house. I

117. [That is, the sense of a photographic copy as a depiction-of-something is
usually and properly a depiction of a particular thing rather than an illustrative
example of a sensible concept.]

118. [Here (Moser, p. 720) Heidegger ends his lecture of Tuesday, 16 February
1926, to be followed by that of Thursday, 18 February, which opened with a 760-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
§31. The schematism of the pure concepts 299
cannot draw “house in general”—only a house of this specific size,
these specific colors, this specific set of materials, and so on.

The constitutive features of “house in general” can vary widely over
a broad field [363] and across different viewpoints (size, color, materi-
als). Moreover, each one of these multiple variations can join with
another determinate variation to depict a specific house. Every intuit-
able depiction of the empirical concept “house” has antecedently de-
cided on a specific set of determinate variations as regards the essen-
tial features of what is to be depicted, viz., the essence “house.”

What is to be depicted in this case is itself empirically intuitable. (I
can always directly see a specific house.) Nonetheless, by its very con-
cept it is much harder to reach through the depiction (the imaged house)
than pure sensible concepts are reachable by way of sensibilization. I
mean “pure sensible concepts” in the sense of geometrical concepts.

In the sensibilization of concepts, the thing to be sensibly depicted—
viz., the concept—functions as a rule governing a general “antecedent
sketch” [Vorzeichnung] that is not to be restricted to only what the
sketch depicts, i.e., renders visible. That which is to be depicted in the
sensibilization, therefore, functions as what shows up in the rule gov-
erning the sensible depiction. Or more precisely: The concept that is to
be depicted sensibly is the basis governing the rule that governs the
depiction. That which does the depicting [of the sensible concept] —i.e.,
a drawing of a specific house—does not make a copy of the essence
“house” the way a photograph of this tree reproduces only this specific
tree. Rather, the drawing sensibilizes the essence “house” in such a
way that the essence “house” prescribes the kind of sensibilization and
the kind of possible sensibilization. And this rule which governs the
intuitive depiction of a concept and which is prescribed by the content
of the concept itself, and which governs the procedure of the sensibi-
lization—this is what Kant calls a schema.

Between the depiction of sensible appearances (in the sense of a
pure image) and the sensibilization of an empirical concept, there is
something else that is neither a depiction nor a schematizing in the
Kantian sense (and I will allude to it only in passing). That is the [364]
depiction of an image in a work of art. A photograph, an image of a
dog in a handbook of zoology, and a painting called “The Dog”—each
depicts something different, and in a different way. The deer in the
forest—those, for example, that Franz Mark has painted—are not these
in this specific forest, but simply “A Deer in the Woods.”''!’ We can also
call this kind of depiction in the artistic sense a “schematizing,” the

119. [Franz Mark (1880-1916), the Munich-born German Expressionist who
died in World War I. See, for example, the reproduction at http://www.artchive
.com/artchive/M/marc/deerwood.jpg.html.]
300 Part II

sensibilization of a concept, as long as we do not understand “concept”
as a theoretical concept—the zoological concept of “deer”—but rather
as the concept of an entity that appears along with me in my world
and that, just like me, has its lived world within the world we share in
common—the deer that, so to speak, is a “forest-dweller,” as contrasted
with the anatomical-zoological concept “deer.”

So long as we heed this distinction between two types of concepts,
and so long as we attend to the different kinds and consequences of
understanding that go with these two kinds of concepts, we can cer-
tainly say that concepts are depicted in art. But by this I mean only that
this sensibilization within artistic depiction is essentially different from
both a mere “picture of” or a theoretical schematizing for, say, zoologi-
cal purposes. In an artistic depiction, there is depicted a concept that, in
the example we have been using, depicts the understanding of an exis-
tent—or better, the understanding of an entity as with me in my lived
world, the understanding of an entity within the world and of its being
within the world. That which is depicted is the deer’s being-in-the-for-
est, along with the form and manner of its being-in-the-forest. We des-
ignate this concept of the deer, and this concept of its being, as a “herme-
neutical concept,” in contrast to a pure thing-concept. [365]

c) Sensibilization of pure sensible concepts

Once again we separate out the sensibilization of pure sensible concepts
from the schematizing of sensible concepts. A pure sensible concept is
not a thing-concept. The triangle that is drawn is never an image of the
triangle in the sense of a copy but rather, in its essence, something sche-
matized: a schema-image, a schema. One might want to say that the
triangle as drawn would still be, if anything, a copy of the concept “tri-
angle.” And in fact, in the sensibilization of pure sensible concepts—
geometric concepts—the multiplicity of varieties of perspective is lim-
ited. Color, magnitude, material and the like are simply irrelevant, and
moreover, the one thing that can vary—figure as such—is easier to sen-
sibilize directly. The sensible [in this case] is, as sensible, closer to the
limit [of sensibility], even though in its essence it remains fundamen-
tally different from sensibility. Here too there is no “copy,” even though
this expression is employed in a mathematical sense. That is, the draw-
ing of the triangle is not a copy of the essence “triangle” —even less than
the drawing of a dog is a copy of “dog-as-such.”

Every sensibilized triangle is a “one’”—this one here—and for fun-
damental reasons, it never attains the generality of a concept. More-
over, as the individual triangle that it necessarily is, it is not, and never
will be, a triangle within the science of geometry, whereas that spe-
cific dog in the painting could very well exist on its own as “this-dog-
here.” The sides and lines [in this drawing of a triangle] are undeni-
§31. The schematism of the pure concepts 301
ably surfaces; they have an extension, which the sides of a geometric
triangle, according to its concept, does not. The schema of this concept
“triangle” is the presentation of the thinkable procedure for the intui-
tive depiction of the pure form [“triangle”] in the space of our lived
world. The procedure—or, the rule of the procedure—is dictated by
the concept. In a certain way the concept dictates a specific mode of its
own sensibilization and thus its own “entry,” as it were, into the space
of the lived world, so that it is thereby illustrated in what is depicted in
the depiction that produces it. [366]

d) Image and schema
In the fourth place we mentioned (and this is the real problem) the
sensibilization of the pure concepts of the understanding: the sensibi-
lization of the categories. This is not just any schema. It is, as Kant
says, the transcendental schema. In order to get any further, we need
a much sharper understanding of the difference between an image
and a schema than we've had heretofore, and we need to nail down
the notion of image that Kant has been simply using from the begin-
ning, but that can be properly understood only by first analyzing the
phenomenon of image-as-copy. We will carry out our analysis of the
difference between an image (now understood in a new way) and a
schema by using Kant’s example of “an image of the number five” (B
179-180).
This image of the number five, which Kant adduces as five dots (¢ ¢
e ee), must be distinguished from the schema of number. The reason
we chose this specific example of the image of the number five in con-
trast to the schema of number is that later on, when we properly dis-
cuss the transcendental schematism, the question of number will sur-
face again. However, scholars have not paid much attention to this
distinction, if they go into it at all. The image of a number is one thing,
and the schema of number is another. Most importantly, number as a
schema is something entirely different from the previous two. There-
fore, before we explain the kind of sensibilization that we put in the
fourth place—indeed, in preparation for that—we shall discuss
1. “image” [Bild] as distinct from image-as-a-copy [Abbild];
2. “image” (in the new sense of no. 1) in its connection with
“schema”;
3. the way schematization is enacted, and the faculty of this
enactment;
4. and finally, the notion of a rule that governs this enactment of
schematization.
Kant writes:
302 Part II

This presentation of a procedure of the imagination for providing an image

for a concept is what I call the schema for that concept. (B 179-80).!*°
And:

The schema is to be distinguished from an image. (B 179).!?!

Then comes the surprising sentence:

The schema of a pure concept of the understanding cannot be brought to

an image at all. (B 181)

The first consequence of this [367] is that the idea of the schematism
that was to be evinced precisely for the pure concepts and categories of
the understanding has been overcome.

To a schema—the sensibilization of a concept—there belongs an
image. In fact, it is the very purpose of the sensibilization, or schema-
tization, to provide an image for a concept. The question is: What do
we mean by “image”? To start, Kant calls these five dots (¢ « * ¢ ¢) an
image of the number five, without explaining, here or anywhere else,
what the phenomenon of an image is. Is it possible at all for a number
to have an image in the sense of a copy? Obviously not, since the
number five does not look anything like these five dots. In fact, the
number five has no “look” at all. Therefore, these five dots are in no
way an image in the sense of a copy. And likewise, “schema” cannot
mean “image” in this case, precisely because later on Kant will sepa-
rate this image of the number five from the schema of a number.

In order to pursue this idea of an image of the number five and a pos-
sible copy of it and to briefly illustrate Kant’s way of presenting it, let us
try to clarify to what degree there is such a thing as the sensibilization
of number. We will stick with the example of the number five.

This “5” and “V” here on the chalkboard are even less an image of
the number five than these five dots are. We call these things here [“5”
and “V”] numeric signs. But on the other hand, the five dots are more
than a “sign” of the number. They have a very definite relation to “five” —
although not to “five” in the sense of this thing [“5” or “V”] here on the

120. [Heidegger omits the word allgemeinen before Verfahren, i.e., “general” be-
fore “procedure.” |

121. [Heidegger omits doch before Schema (while Guyer and Wood do not translate
it). The use of doch (“certainly”) in this sentence is to emphasize the difference be-
tween Bild, an image that is a copy of a specific thing, and Schema as the rule govern-
ing the sensibilization of a concept. Whereas an image-qua-copy-of-something
“aims at an individual intuition” (“einzelne Anschauung... zur Absicht hat”), a
schema has as its aim “the unity in the determination of sensibility” (B 179).]
§31. The schematism of the pure concepts 303
chalkboard. These two things [the five dots and the two numeric
signs]'** have absolutely nothing to do with each other. The most they
have in common is that both have been written with chalk on the
chalkboard. But these five dots certainly do have to do with “5,” that
is, with the concept that this numeric sign means. That is: these five
dots are able to be counted by means of the concept “five,” and when
it comes to their “how-many,” they can be determined as this many
thanks to the concept “five.” So, even though these five dots, taken in
their pure thing-ness, have nothing to do with the [368] concept
“five,” they still do have a specific connection with the number “five”
insofar as they are what-gets-counted, or what-can-be-counted, with
this number.

In a certain sense, these five dots have a closer relation to the con-
cept “five” than they do when I (as we say) “enumerate” them as
“table, chair, pen, book, ashtray.” Those things are also “five” as long
as I abstract from their content and see each of them as just a “one-
something,” and then see each “one-something” as determinable in
another possible “one” and as addable as this set of “ones.” In a certain
sense, the five dots have a closer relation to the number insofar as (1)
they are not different in their content the way the five objects I men-
tioned are and (2) the viewpoint of “how many?” is more immediate.
In addition, (3) this spatial ordering of the five dots likewise demon-
strates the series-character of a numeric manifold, much more than
when I depict the five dots in the form of *:—although on the other
hand one can and must say that, when it comes to indicating numbers
in the natural and pre-theoretical order, very specific constellations (and
not just dots-in-a-row) are employed.

Therefore, on the basis of their more limited content and greater
lack of differentiation, these five dots somehow have a closer relation
to the concept “five.” But what we saw earlier regarding the sensible
depiction of geometric figures holds here as well, only in a different
form. These five dots are just as essentially different from the concept
“five” as any five specific objects, regardless of their content, that one
might choose. Therefore we have to keep separate:

e the numeric signs;

122. [The referent of the German “diese beiden Dinge” is ambiguous. It could
refer to the two numeric signs—the 5 and the V—that Heidegger has just written
on the chalkboard. It is also possible that “these two things” refers, on the one
hand, to the five dots, and on the other hand, to the 5 and V taken together. In
that case, Heidegger would have earlier drawn the five dots with chalk on the
chalkboard. And it would seem he did. Twice in this paragraph he speaks of “these
five dots,” thereby giving the impression that they too, like the 5 and the V, were
up on the chalkboard. ]
304 Part II

e the intuitive depiction of a “so many” in a manifold of visible,
countable things;

e the fact that I can sensibly depict the number five in yet another
and very different way (which I will not go into further), namely as

8 — 3, or 4+ 1, or 167 — 162, and so on ad infinitum.

Therefore I can depict the number five within the act of counting.

In contrast to the second form of sense-depiction (namely, sensibi-
lization by way of those five dots), Kant now distinguishes [369] the
schema of number. And in establishing the distinction he begins with
the fact that “only with difficulty [can we] get a comprehensive view”
(B 179) of an image for larger numbers—i.e., a bunch of things, given
to intuition, that would add up to such a large number. We can’t rely
on a direct comprehension of all the countable dots—we can’t hold
them together in a unity—that would add up to this specific number,
say, “5,768.” Instead, we need a specific procedure, if only for drawing
the dots, a procedure that has to follow a specific rule and come to an
end at a specific point. There is no direct sensibilization for such large
numbers as there is for, say, the number five. Instead, to understand
those large numbers we rely on the presentation of a method of their
possible intuitive depiction. That means understanding the possible
way of numbering something given to intuition as a succession of dots.
Therefore, it is a procedure for sensibilizing a number, according to a
rule regarding countable things, namely dots. The presentation of
such a procedure for the sensibilization of a concept—or that which
such a procedure can present—is what Kant calls the schema.'??

* * *

An “image of the number five” simply means: something that is intu-
itable in some way and is meant to indicate that number. Here “image”
simply means “that which appears directly to intuition.” In German
we speak of Landschaftsbildern, and the word can have two senses. It
can mean “landscapes” in the sense of paintings that depict natural
scenery. But it can also refer to “landscape scenery,” actual landscapes
that we see. In the latter case, when I see a Landschaftsbild, 1 actually
see an actual landscape, not a depiction of it. The question is: How is
this meaning of “image” [Bild] connected with the meaning of what
we earlier called an Abbild, an “image-as-copy” ?

In an Abbild, an image as a copy, we distinguish between the Abbil-
dende and the Abgebildete, i.e., the painting itself that depicts something

123. [Here (Moser, p. 741) Heidegger ends his lecture of Thursday, 18 February
1926, to be followed by that of Friday, 19 February, which opened with a 580-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
§31. The schematism of the pure concepts 305
(or: the depiction) and that which is depicted in it. That which does the
depicting is this picture here, painted with oils on canvas. But we can
also turn this painting [370] into an object of discussion and study it in
its own right, say, in terms of its degree of preservation. Is it well pre-
served or not? Has it been damaged? Was it subsequently restored?
When I consider the painting in this fashion, I am looking at it primar-
ily as a “painted thing” (that happens to depict something). I treat it as
an image-thing while prescinding from whatever is depicted in it.

However, what is depicted in the painting—say, the sunflowers Van
Gogh painted—does not get damaged if the picture should happen to
suffer damage. Consider the case of an artist who sets out to depict
sunflowers that are wilted and spoiled.'** He will succeed at the task
not by producing a spoiled picture but by producing a picture so per-
fectly unspoiled that it depicts what it is meant to: the wilted flowers.
And it is what is depicted that we see if we approach and understand
the picture naturally. That is what we see first of all: the thing de-
picted. It shows up directly—whereas it takes a mental somersault to
understand the picture as a “painted thing.”

The Abgebildete—the thing insofar as it has been copied and depicted
in an image—is what we can simply intuit [in the painting]. It is what
simply shows up and can been seen: the Bild or image. It has the same
meaning here as when we speak of a Bild or image of a landscape. Here
a Bild no longer means [as in the case of a death-mask] some image that,
as a copy of something, refers us to that something. Here, rather, a Bild
or image is that which, qua depiction, shows itse/f. It is what is intuitively
visible in and through the depiction. More precisely, “image” means the
“looks,” the “visible aspect” the thing offers of itself. It is the species, what
is seeable and seen, what is given to an act of intuiting. We refer, for
example, to the “image” that someone can give of himself, as in the
phrase, “He presented a remarkable image of himself in that situation.”
In this case “image” simply means what is visible in itself.

This is the sense of the word “image” that Kant uses in his exposi-
tion of the schematism. Concepts cannot be copied in an image [abge-
bildet] but they must be furnished with an image [Bild]. That is, they
must somehow be able to offer a visible aspect of themselves in some-
thing intuitable, something which can be depicted in a procedure
whose rules are dictated by the very concept that is to be depicted.
[371] Therefore, visible aspects of concepts must, in principle, be able
to be produced. These images—or quite simply, visible, intuitable as-
pects—that arise from a depiction regulated by the concepts them-
selves indicate the schema, i.e., they indicate the rule governing their
own depictability; and by way of this rule they indicate what dictates

124. [See, for example, van Gogh’s Two Cut Sunflowers and Four Cut Sunflowers. |
306 Part II
the rule itself, namely the concept. And yet these images “are never
fully congruent with the concepts,” as Kant says (B 181).

The schema is the rule for carrying out sensibilization, and sensibili-
zation means the production of a visible aspect for a concept, i.e., some-
thing that shows itself and by showing itself somehow makes the con-
cept visible, but notin any sense of copying it in an image. This production
of a visible aspect is not simply a direct act of intuiting a given, because
that would be a matter of simply finding a visible aspect already there,
whereas the visible aspect has to be produced. It is a matter of producing
a visible aspect, an image, and providing it to oneself. And this produc-
tion of an image [Bild] is itself, we might say, an act of forming [Bilden].
In fact we use the word “to form” in the direct sense of “to produce.” But
“to produce” is an action; and the basic form of all actions, of all acts of
“forming” on the part of the subject—for example, the formation of con-
cepts—is an act of combining, a synthesis. I mean synthesis in the sense
of forming and producing a possible visible aspect, a species. That is what
Kant calls the synthesis speciosa or “figurative synthesis” [B 151].

This synthesis, the synthesis speciosa, is distinguished from the syn-
thesis intellectualis, combining as an action of the pure understanding,
which qua understanding cannot give anything. The production of a
visible aspect, a synthesis speciosa, is therefore neither a pure action of
the understanding—because the understanding /ets nothing be seen, it
gives no species—nor is it a pure achievement of sensibility, because
sensibility only allows things to be given to itself, it only intuits what
is given. It never, from out of itself, gives itself an image (cf. B 151).
This synthesis as synthesis speciosa is neither [372] just understanding
nor just sensibility, neither just spontaneity nor just receptivity. But
neither is it both of them together. The synthesis speciosa or figurative
synthesis must therefore belong to a faculty that is spontaneous recep-
tivity or receptive spontaneity. And this faculty, as its conceptual form
already indicates, stands between sensibility and understanding, and
it is what Kant calls the imagination [Hinbildungskraft]. He says,

A synthesis in general is, as we shall subsequently see, the mere effect of

the imagination, of a blind though indispensable function of the soul,

without which we would have no cognition at all, but of which we are

seldom even conscious. (B 103)

Sensibilization, as the formation of a visible aspect, is carried out in the
synthesis speciosa, and it is an act of the imagination. Kant divides the
imagination into the empirical (or reproductive) imagination and the
productive imagination. In the reproductive imagination receptivity is,
so to speak, dominant. Here, the having of an image is predominantly a
matter of Jetting itself be given an image. It is a matter of the imagination
§31. The schematism of the pure concepts 307
letting itself be carried along by the syntheses (i.e., connections) as as-
sociation offers them. In the productive imagination, on the other hand,
spontaneity is what guides matters. And the synthesis speciosa, as it func-
tions in the schematism, belongs to the productive imagination.

Sensibilization as enacted by the imagination must be kept strictly
separate from sensible intuition itself. In phenomenological terms, the
distinction emerges still more sharply when we contrast the phenome-
nal character of the corresponding objects of the imagination and of
sensible, empirical intuition respectively. The indeterminate object of
an empirical intuition is what Kant calls “appearance.” Intuition is em-
pirical insofar as it relates to its object by way of sensation (B 34). Ac-
cording to Kant, however, sensations are “presentations... [that] are
effectuated by the Gegenwart {Anwesenheit, presence} of some thing” (Re-
flexionen, Akademie-Ausgabe [373], vol. 15, no. 619). Sensations are
“presented modifications of the status of the subject through the Gegen-
wart {Anwesenheit, presence} of the object” (ibid., no. 619). Therefore, a
sensation is a presented modification, i.e., a conscious modification
given as present in inner sense, which is effected by the presence-now
[Gegenwart] (as Kant says) of the object.

But here again Kant is basically unclear. We don’t know whether
he means “object” in the intentional sense or simply in the causal
sense of being-present-with, i.e., the simultaneous occurrence of two
events, the effecting and the being modified. The way Kant funda-
mentally understands the mutual presence of the outer and inner
world compels us to understand presence-now [Gegenwart] in this pas-
sage not in the intentional but in the causal sense. That is: a sensation’s
being in consciousness is effected by the presence of something that
stimulates and produces an effect. Of course, Kant was also aware of
the intentional sense of the presence of what produces the effect, but
basically he never makes use of it. This muddled concept of experience
goes back to Democritus, who understood sensations primarily as a
matter of touch, and who reinterpreted the intentional presence of the
touchable into the mere there-ness of one thing (an atom) with an-
other atom (the one touched). Democritus thereby changed an inten-
tional relation—that of the intentional presence of something for an
act of touching that reaches out to it—into the mere thereness-with-
each-other of whatever produces the cause and whatever experiences
its influence. This muddle in the concept of experience has held on
right up to today. It is really only in the research and work of phenom-
enology that the concept has been cleared up and employed in a pre-
cise sense.

In order to occur, empirical intuition requires the presence of an
object. Moreover, what is intuited in empirical intuition must be intu-
ited in the intuition itself as something present on hand.
308 Part II

In contrast to that, Kant says of the imagination, “Imagination is the
faculty [374] for presenting an object even without the object being pres-
ent-now in intuition” (B 151). Here again, in the phrase “without the
object being present-now,” we find the same fundamental lack of clar-
ity. Does Kant mean “without the presence of the influence [Fin-
wirkung]| of the object”? Or is it “without the object being seen and
intended in its bodily presence”? (For good reasons, we necessarily
interpret it in the second sense, even though Kant presumably thought
it in the first and opposite sense.) So the imaginatio shows something,
it provides an image (“image” in the sense our interpretation has fi-
nally established) —not in the sense of going out to something already
there, but in the sense of Fin-bildung, forming-an-image.'*’ In concep-
tual, structural terms, the imaginatio provides a specific mode of [in-
tentional] presence for something that is not there. The image of the
“five dots” is, as Kant says, a product of the empirical faculty of imagi-
nation. As I think the number “five,” I can always “bring visually to
mind” the five dots; I can, freely and from out of myself, bring into a
specific kind of [intentional] presence, something that is not there.

By contrast, “the schema of sensible concepts (such as figures in
space) is a product and as it were a monogram of pure a priori imagina-
tion” (B 181). The schema is a product of the imagination. With the
concept “schema” Kant again oscillates, as he does with the concepts
of depiction, intuition, sensation, and so on.'*° “Schema” means both
the image that springs from schematization and at the same time the
schematization itself, or the rule of schematization, the rule governing
the procedure of the synthesis speciosa.

Because our intuition is in principle sensible (B 151), the provision
of an image, as it can be freely carried out in the imagination, is al-
ways referred to sensibility. But even the freest and least constrained
imagination can serve up only visible aspects whose possibilities are
somehow prescribed by the qualities of appearances in general. There-
fore, that wherein the imagination’s image is formed is limited by what
can possibly be given in sensibility in general.

A schema is the mode of the general procedure governing figurative
synthesis. It is the provision of an image according to a rule, and the
rule is prescribed by the concept that is to be sensibly depicted. [375]
The rule says: The free, intuitive visualization [of the concept] must
proceed in such a way that the intuitive aspect that is to be formed ren-

125. [The German word for “imagination” is Hinbildungskraft, literally “the
power of imagining something,” creating fantasies, etc. Heidegger interprets the
term as the power of forming or giving an image. ]

126. [The following paragraphs have profited from a comparison of GA 21 with
Moser, pp. 751ff.]
§31. The schematism of the pure concepts 309
ders visible, in some way, what the content of the rule prescribes. The
rule entails having a pre-view of both the concept that prescribes the
rule and simultaneously of that wherein the something is to be sensibly
depicted according to the rule. Through the rule and its constitutive pre-
views, the depicted and what does the depicting are connected. In the
rule (i.e., in the schema) I think the concept not simply as such, but in
such a way that I understand it as what prescribes the synthesis speciosa
of the imagination. Therefore, in the rule (the schema), the concept is
understood in its prescribing function: it prescribes the manner and
mode of the synthesis, of the forming-into-an image. Consequently the
concept, in its prescriptive function for the actual forming of the image,
is at the same time the visible aspect that can be seen in the image that
gets formed. Therefore, the schema, as the rule of the synthesis speciosa,
contains both the prescribing concept (the prescription itself) and that
in which the prescribed formation of the image is to be carried out and
given. To put it in objective terms: The rule combines the concept that is
to be sensibly depicted with the image that is to make the concept visi-
ble. That lies in the very structure of the rule, which Kant did not ana-
lyze any further. So the notion of the schema in general is to be under-
stood as follows. The schema is the rule governing the imagination’s
figurative synthesis, a rule which is prescribed by a concept and which
itself prescribes the sensible depiction of the concept.

e) Sensibilization of the pure concepts of understanding
With the above we are sufficiently prepared to understand the fourth
point: the sensibilization of the pure concepts of understanding. In
this case it is a matter of a transcendental schema, and when we clar-
ify that, we will understand what is meant by the schematism of the
pure concepts of the understanding, viz., as a procedure of the spon-
taneity of the understanding with regard to schemata. We will under-
stand the schematism as the way the spontaneity of the understand-
ing is enacted in the form of the spontaneity of the productive
imagination as figurative synthesis. [376]
What pertains to a transcendental or pure schema? The concept of
schema was explained earlier. The question now is:
¢ Can a priori concepts have an a priori depiction in something that is
ad priori given?
e Can there be a rule governing this depiction?
e Is there something that can show up a priori in such a way that
something can be a priori depicted in it?
e Is there an a priori image for a priori concepts?
But Kant says that “the schema of a pure concept of the understanding
is something that can never be brought to an image” (B 180). To say
310 Part II

that there is no image for pure concepts means that, insofar as they are
concepts, they cannot be by way of a copy [abgebildet]. “No image”
means no empirical image, i.e., no directly accessible empirical schema-
image like the five dots. Nonetheless, if the talk about the schema of a
category is to have any meaning at all, there must be an image in the
sense of a schema-image. The category must be able to be sensibly de-
picted. And the way in which it can and must be depicted is precisely
what should be shown by the explanation of the schematism of the
pure categories of understanding.

Why then did Kant deny so abruptly the possibility of a pure schema
having an image? That is his way of saying that a pure schema must have
an a priori image because the depiction of the pure concepts of the under-
standing must be a priori necessary and possible. The a priori concept
must be able to be sensibilized and to show up in and as something that
can show up a priori. But the one thing that antecedently and a priori
shows up and in every appearances that shows up—is time. Time is the a
priori of sensibility and the a priori of any possible a priori sensibilization.

However, as Kant constantly emphasizes (in the demonstrations of
the Analogies: cf. the passages cited above), time is something that can-
not be perceived, something that does not directly show up to any em-
pirical view as, and only as, itself. Therefore, the sentence above, in
which Kant says that a pure schema cannot have an image, can only
mean: The pure understanding cannot have a sensible image. Rather,
[377] the only possible image it can have is the a priori condition of sen-
sibility itself, namely time, that which is unthematically pre-viewed in
the pre-view that is antecedent in all intuiting. This pre-viewed [viz.,
time], which shows up constantly but unthematically in the pre-view—
this peculiar sight that is seen in the unthematic pre-view—this is a
particular and pre-eminent “self-showing”: it is a species, an image. And
therefore, even though Kant denies that a pure schema can have an
image, he can still speak of time as an image. Time is a pre-eminent a
priori image, a “pure image”: “The pure image... for all objects of the
senses in general is time” (B 182).!?7

* * *

We say that the pure schema of the categories cannot be brought into
any image at all; that means it can be brought only into a “pure image.”
This means that there is only one thing in which the pure concepts of
the understanding can and must be depicted, only one thing in which
they must show themselves as what they are—and that is a single pos-

127. [Here (Moser, p. 756) Heidegger ends his lecture of Friday, 19 February
1926, to be followed by that of Monday, 22 February, which opened with a 450-
word summary that is omitted in GA 21.]
§31. The schematism of the pure concepts 311
sible visible aspect, namely, what is pre-viewed in the pre-view: time.
Time is that which is first determined and then schematized in the
synthesis speciosa (which itself is ruled by the categories), so that, as an
image—a specific form of pure self-showing—it shows something,
makes it visible. Time does so precisely because it has been itself deter-
mined according to the transcendental determination of time, which
in each case belongs to the pure schema and constitutes time. Like-
wise, time—or more precisely the transcendental determination of
time—is the schema, “the sensible condition under which alone pure
concepts of the understanding can be employed” (B 175). The schema,
as the rule governing the figurative synthesis of time, presents time
itself, or more precisely: it presents the category in the image of time.
A schema is a transcendental time-determination.

To get a full, rich sense of the phenomenon of “pure schema,” let us
define the notion of the pure schema in Latin:

Schema purum dicit: regula syntheseos speciosae temporis secundum unum syn-

thesin puram intellectualem constituens sive secundum categoriam.

The pure schema [378] is the rule governing the figurative synthesis of

time according to the unity constituting the pure synthesis of the under-

standing, or in other words according to the category.

The schema is the regula syntheseos temporis [rule governing the synthesis
of time]. Or again, briefly, the schema is the synthesis speciosa secundum
categoriam [figurative synthesis in keeping with the category]. Or as Kant
puts it in even shorter form (but I will expand his words): the schema
is the categoria phaenomenon [category qua phenomenon]: the schema is
the category as it shows itself, the phaenomenon. That is the abbreviated
way of saying: “the rule of the self-manifestation of the category in
the image of time,” the schema categoriae per speciem temporis [schema of
the category in or through the image of time].

Of this procedure regulated in this fashion Kant says:

This schematism of our understanding with regard to appearances and

their mere form is a hidden art in the depths of the human soul, whose

true operations we can divine from nature and lay unveiled before our

eyes only with difficulty. (B 181-182)

In point of fact Kant looks into an abyss here, but only so as to with-
draw his view immediately and to forego actually discovering this basic
structure. Perhaps as well, equipped with his methodic means for inter-
preting “the human soul” (i.e., the structure of our human existence),
he found himself confronting a barrier. He even tries to excuse him-
self for backing off from a radical explanation of this structure:
312 Part II
Rather than pausing now for a dry and boring analysis of what is required
for transcendental schemata of pure concepts of the understanding in gen-
eral, we would rather present them according to the order of the categories
and in connection with these. (B 181)

This second way of proceeding is certainly just as necessary as the first

way of explaining the pure schema in general, and it is the only practical

method for explaining individual schemata concretely. In fact, Kant
makes a good start at giving a detailed interpretation of the individual
schemata, but basically he explains only three of the twelve in any de-
tail [379]—and characteristically, they are the schemata of quantity,
reality, and substance, in other words the categories in which existent
nature first appears as an entity that is to be comprehended in the deter-
minate measurements of physics. Twelve schemata would have to be
developed in accordance with the twelve categories, which themselves
correspond to the twelve forms of judgment taken as concepts of the
unities constitutive of these ways of combining. (1) These twelve sche-
mata would have to be explained in their order of succession as well as
in their inner connection. Moreover, such an investigation [would also
have to provide] (2) the rigorously demonstrated derivation of the cate-
gories from the Table of Judgments (as regards their possibility and in-
trinsic necessity), as well as (3) their derivation from the “I think.” How-
ever, these three elements of a truly fundamental investigation of the
possible groundwork of the Critique of Pure Reason are lacking. So, from
the start, Kant’s explanation of the schemata remains on a terrain that
is both uncertain and undeveloped. Nonetheless, we must try to shed
some light on his explanation of the schemata of quantity, reality, and
substance. And we will try to do that with an eye to our guiding ques-
tion: How is time understood—or how must it be understood—in these
schemata as rules governing the transcendental determination of time?

Staying with our already elaborated problematic of ur-temporality
is the only way to get a substantive understanding of Kant’s explana-
tion and to see how close to the problematic he was pushed as well as
why he necessarily could not get access to it. Our inquiry will ask
about the three categories of quantity, reality, and substance:

1. What does the figurative synthesis regulated by these categories
show in the pure image of time?

2. How is this sensible appearance of time understood? That is: How is
it that what gets determined in the synthesis speciosa is always time?
What kind of determination of time is operative here?

3. In each of the three cases [quality, reality, and substance], does
“time” mean the same thing? or something different in each case?
and if so, why? [380]
§32. Number as the schema of quantity 313

To the three categories of quantity, reality, and substance there cor-
respond three schemata. The schema of quantity is number, numerus.
The schema of reality is sensation, sensatio. The schema of substantial-
ity is perdurance, the perdurabile.

§32. Number as the schema of quantity

We should note that we have already dealt with number in our earlier
discussions regarding schematism, and there the issue was a possible
sensibilization—schematization—of number itself: it was a matter of dis-
covering the schema for a number. But now, by way of contrast, it is a
question of the sensibilization of the category “quantity,” whose pure
image is number itself. Number is primarily nothing else but the pure
image of quantity. As regards its conceptual character, this pure image
of quantity is a pure sensible concept; and as a pure sensible concept,
number in turn requires sensibilization, a new schematization. Kant did
not provide any further discussion of these various schematisms—the
schematism of quantity as number; the schematism of number itself is
some kind of spatial form—nor did he show their inner connection.

The schema of quantity is number, mumerus. That means: The syn-
thesis speciosa temporis is regulated by “quantity” or “plurality,” and
what it makes visible in the image is number. This first has to be ex-
plained in phenomenological terms, and to do that we have to come
up with some answers:
¢ In what way does time underlie the synthesis speciosa in this schema,

“number”?

e What kind of time-determination shows up there?
e And what does the “determination of time” mean in the schema

“number”?

Kant’s answer to all of this is: In the schema “number,” the determi-
nation of time is the production of time.

In the explanation that follows you must try to really see the things
at stake. The rule for rendering visible the pure category of quantity in
the image of time is number. This rule [381] itself is a transcendental
determination of time with regard to plurality. The mode of carrying
out this determination of time is the synthesis speciosa, which has the
pure time-manifold in view and which, as a productive giving of the
image (giving it from out of itself and to itself), has to render this time-
manifold visible.

Rendering the pure time-manifold visible simply means highlighting
the pure one-after-another, the now-sequence, that is, the nows them-
314 Part II
selves: “now and now and now and now.” In this, each now is of the
same kind as every other now: each now is a now. But at the same time,
each now qua now is different from every other one. Every now is of the
same kind as every other now—and every now is a “this,” a “thus-and-
so.” The “now” articulates a “this,” a this which is of the same kind as
every other “this,” to each of which there always corresponds another
“now.” The multiplicity of “nows,” which is a multiplicity of “now-this-
now-that,” thus renders something visible—namely, the “this-nesses” as
such. But the highlighting of the nows whereby a “this” is rendered vis-
ible, that is, the highlighting of the nows in the synthesis speciosa, is per-
formed from out of a pre-view of plurality; and this unity-providing
pre-view determines this particular “now-this” more exactly. The phrase
“now-this” means “now-this-many.”'*® Moreover, the synthesis gov-
erned by the pre-view of plurality does not signify merely “now-this-
much, now-that-much.” Rather, prior to the highlighting and isolating
[of the nows] that is carried out in the synthesis, the synthesis itself is
primarily a “now-this-much plus now-that-much.” Thanks to the pre-
view of plurality, the combination via the formal “and” becomes a
“plus.” Hence “one this, and another this” becomes “this ‘one,’ plus that
‘one,’ plus that ‘one’”—i.e., three.’”? The “nows” are not counted in this
synthesis speciosa, because the result of the synthesis is not number but
the “how-many-nows” in the time that elapsed. Even apart from the
fact that number itself is already presupposed in any “how-many-nows”
of elapsed time, the result would still be a certain number of “nows”
that were counted. Instead of all that, the number itse/fis what is to be
constituted as a schema. Therefore, what gets combined [382] is not the
“nows.” Rather, it is the pure “this-nesses” of any and all “nows,” the
pure “this-nesses” that are co-given when the nows are brought into
relief on the basis of the pure image of time as a now-sequence. To re-
peat once more: The process of constituting the true and proper provi-
sion of an image goes as follows:
e Now-this, then another now-this—a manifold of this’s, if you will.
e But this manifold is already and antecedently present in the pre-

view of quantity, i.e., of “how much.”
e Therefore, in the synthesis a “this” is already antecedently under-

stood as a “one.”

128. [In German the play is between Jetzt-So and Jetzt-Soviel, literally “now-so”
and “now-so-many.” |

129. [The German changes from “ein Dieses und ein Dieses” to “dieses Eins plus
dieses Eins,” etc. In English, the German ein can mean both the indefinite article
“a” and the numerical adjective “one.” The German Eins is “one” as a number. ]
§32. Number as the schema of quantity 315
e Moreover, the “and” of the synthesis is already understood to be
characterized by quantity: one and one and one, etc.

Thus what shows up in the synthesis speciosa temporis secundum quan-
titatem [synthesis that produces an image of time corresponding to
quantity or magnitude’*®] is the pure “numerical amount” [das
Gezdhite]. But we must distinguish between this “pure numerical
amount” and some thing that gets counted up [das Abgezahlte]. The
pure numerical amount is always the particular amount as such. This
amount (and every other amount as such) is what every specific num-
ber numbers-as-an-amount (and does nothing else but that). Any
number [say, five] does not count up and determine something else
[say, five dots]. No, the number itself is that amount. A number is a
number only as the numbering-of-an-amount [Zdahlen]. And as this
kind of numbering, the number co-numbers (if I may put it that way)
along with the other numbers. To say it “co-numbers” means nothing
else than that it belongs with the other numbers.

This numbering-of-an-amount, as co-numbering along with the
other numbers, is the very being of number. Therefore, this numbering-
of-an-amount that the number carries out “forms” [bildet], of and by
itself, the series of numbers. By contrast, a thing that has been counted
up is something that is not itself a number—or, at any rate, need not be
a number. Rather, it is first of all something that we can declare to be of
such and such an amount with regard toa number. Any manifold at all
can be counted up. Numbers too can be counted up—I can say: “12, 73,
84, 51, and 67 are five numbers.” In this case a manifold of numbers its
itself counted, but counted with regard to a number. The fact that num-
bers are counted up in this case does not change the fact that a counting
up is going on. And this process, as a counting-up of numbers, is in no
way identical with the pure numbering-of-an-amount.

So what is really numbered in the pure numbering-of-an-amount?
Whatever the case may be, pure numbering-of-an-amount cannot
number-the-amount of anything in the sense of “counting it up,” be-
cause “number-of-an-amount” would already be presupposed in such
counting. Rather, here it is a matter of a numbering in which the num-
ber itself and as such is. Such [383] numbering is the numbering-of-a-
certain-amount on the part of the number itself, which is the very being
of number.””' As itself the numbering-of-an-amount, number is the rule

130. [For this translation of quantitas as “magnitude” (die Bloge Gréfe), see B
745.]

131. [In this sentence, Sichselbstzahlen surely should not be “the number’s num-
bering of itself.” The faux reflexive is at least a passive, and more likely a tautol-
ogy: “The being of a number is to be the number-of-a-certain amount,” or with an
316 Part II

governing the possibility of rendering visible and determining any
quantum. In this synthesis speciosa temporis in which number is consti-
tuted, time itself is perceived, but not thematically (since that is a priori
impossible). Rather, ttime—which has been brought into relief as “now,”
and in fact as a “now-this”—provides, in these this’s, something that
can be numbered as regards an amount. This manifold of “now-this’s”
is not what gets numbered or counted up; rather, that manifold is the
condition of the possibility of numbers themselves. Every number is, a
priori, a determinate possibility of pure numbering-of-an-amount; that
is, it is a rule. The function of time in this synthesis speciosa consists in
providing an image—i.e., rendering visible—not itself gua time, but the
this’s that correspond to every now and that are of the same kind even
though each “this” is different. So the this’s are the condition of the pos-
sibility of numbering-an-amount. For every concrete act of counting up
is possible only if I comprehend a multiplicity (however various its con-
tent may be) in such a way that I bring it into a pure multiplicity of mere
“somethings.” Only then can I count them up. Otherwise I could never
count a pear, an apple, a stone, or any other objects.

We must remember that what is counted is not the nows. That means:
the word “time” in the phrase synthesis speciosa temporis is not be under-
stood as a genitivus objectivus [objective genitive],'*? as if time were the
thematic object of the synthesis. Yet on the other hand, time certainly
is the primary object that the synthesis speciosa relates to, such that in and
through the synthesis, time appears-along-with. In this process of ap-
pearing-along-with and being unthematically brought into relief, time
articulates pure ability to number-an-amount. Neither is time itself the
numbered amount, nor will Kant say that counting necessarily needs
time in the sense that it has to elapse in time. People usually interpret
Kant this way, and then refute him by showing that
1. other behaviors also necessarily occur [384] over time; therefore

time is not a distinctive feature of counting; and
2. Kant confuses counting and number; and numbers are not in time

at all.
is-qua-copula: “The number itself is nothing but the numbering-of-a-certain-
amount.” ]

132. [An objective genitive is one in which the person or thing named by the
modifying genitive is the passive object or recipient of what is named in the noun
it modifies. A subjective genitive is one in which the person or thing named by the
modifying genitive is the subject that actively possesses or is the source of what is
named in the noun it modifies. “Napoleon’s defeat” expresses a subjective genitive
if it refers to Napoleon’s defeat of the Prussians on 14 October 1806; it expresses
an objective genitive if it refers to the defeat Napoleon suffered at Waterloo on 18
June 1815.]
§32. Number as the schema of quantity 317

Kant’s analysis of the pure schema “number” is quite rough, and
gives occasion for such misunderstanding. But he never had in mind
anything as trivial as that counting takes place over time. What he
wanted to do was clarify number itself in its own proper constitution.
And the decisive thing is that he discovered (to put it roughly) that time
is embedded in number itself, quite apart from whether counting oc-
curs over time or not, and regardless of whether numbers themselves
are in time or not. Precisely because numbers are not i time, they have,
as their very being, a constitutive relation to time itself. To be sure, this
relation remains obscure in Kant, but I have tried to bring it out in my
interpretation so as to determine the specific content of what Kant was
after.

Insofar as Kant brings number and time together in the way we
explained above, that bringing-together does not mean that “counting
elapses over time.” But at the same time it does mean that, in bringing
them together, Kant has to have understood time as different from the
kind of time that we mean in saying that something elapses in time.
This latter is the time that Kant understands primarily as world-time
and the time of nature. But in this transcendental determination of
time, time shows up in a very different and much more original way.
It appears in this way for Kant as well, even though, as our analysis
has already shown, he had to hold on to the idea of time as now-time.
So now we will have to ask:

e How is time understood in this transcendental time-determination
of the schema “number”?
¢ Does this analysis of the transcendental time-determination of the
schema “number,” of the schema of reality, and of the schema of
substance let us experience something fundamental about what
time itself is?!’
* * *

Our analyses of the schematism of number have prepared us for the
answer to the above questions. [385] In answering them, we will have
to draw out [herausholen] of those analyses something that Kant may
have surmised, even though it remained inaccessible to him. In fact,
to the degree that Kant did surmise this issue, he expressed it (and had
to express it) in inadequate concepts and characterizations.

In the synthesis speciosa temporis, what happens is a looking-away
from the now—in and through the now—and simply a synthesizing of

133. [Here (Moser, p. 770) Heidegger ends his lecture of 22 February 1926, to be
followed by that of Tuesday, 23 February, which opened with a 430-word sum-
mary that is omitted in GA 21.]
318 Part II

a this with the manifold of this’s with regard to “how much.” So time
does not show itself in the synthesis speciosa; rather, it shows something
else without showing itself, which is to say: Time is a pure image.
Bringing the sequence of nows into relief provides the pure manifold
of what-is-of-the-same-kind—i.e., the pure manifold of this’s—as ab-
solutely necessary if any number is to be able to be counted at all. The
being of this manifold of what-is-of-the-same-kind (i.e., of all this’s) is
the pure “there is given... .” [»es gibt«]. What is given is the very being
of the “that” in the phrase “That is given” [es gibt es]. But “who” does
the giving? “Who” is the es that gives? The answer is: the now.

Kant says: The schema “number” is “the production of time itself” (B
184).’4 In this case “production” cannot mean first and foremost the
bringing-forth or creating of a time. Rather, if this schematism is to have
any sense at all, it means: the unthematic highlighting of the now, such
that this “now” provides a “this.” With regard to “much-ness,” the “this”
is a “so much.” The character of the transcendental time-determination
in the schema “number” is time-production in the sense that we have
explained. It does not mean that time is first created by counting. Time
is produced in the only way it can be in the present context: it is brought
forth [her-gestellt], in such a way that it can give something. Time func-
tions as an image that does not show itself in itself as a whole, but that
nonetheless shows something else. And the synthesis speciosa, as provid-
ing images, gives this image—so much so that this image, as a now-se-
quence itself, always gives a this.

Kant does not explain this peculiar function of time at all. None-
theless, he calls time a “pure image.” And in the passage where he
speaks of the “production of time,” he speaks of “the production of
time itself im the successive apprehension of an [386] object” (B 184).!”
That is the same as saying: producing time does not mean relating
thematically to time itself; rather, it is the production of time in the
apprehension.'*° On the other hand, this conception of the schema
“number” and its relation to time provides a strong occasion for the
usual misunderstandings, as if Kant were saying: “In comprehending,
one-after-another, objects in the broadest sense, time is used and this
counting runs its course over time.”

But we can also understand “object” [Gegenstand] in a quite broad
sense, and in this case as “the ‘this’ that shows up in the now.” And we
can take “apprehension” as “pure apprehension” (cf. A 100) of a mani-

134. [Heidegger omits the word synthesis: ,. . . die Erzeugung, (Synthesis) der
Zeit selbst.“ ]

135. [Again Heidegger omits “(Synthesis)” after “production.” The italics are
mine. ]

136. [Here following Moser, p. 775.9-10.]
§33. Sensation as the schema of reality 319
fold. The “successive apprehension” would then be the pure number-
ing on the part of the number itself, which certainly does not take
place over time. And therefore all the more fundamentally does the
successive apprehension require time, since time always provides, a
priori, the very entity that can be counted.!*”

The Kantian explanation of number as a schema remains incom-
plete and lacking in clarity, but one thing is clear: An ur-temporal
determination of time—in this case, the ur-temporal production of
time—does not understand time as time that is itself measured.

Pure number numbers-an-amount—it “numbers-an-amount” along
with other numbers, which do the same thing. This pure numbering
that number is, is in itself a highlighting of the now. Time is embedded
in number as such; this pure numbering that number itself is, is a rule
for counting off the countable. Number is a condition of the possibility
for the countability of something, i.e., for the fact that entities can be
quantitatively determined. That is, number—the schema, the ur-tempo-
ral time-determination that we have characterized—is the condition of
the possibility for the fact that the pure category of quantity can be re-
lated to appearances, i.e., that there can be something like the measur-
ability'*® of objects, or objective measuring in general. Along with that,
there pertains to the schema of quantity the constitution of the count-
ability of whatever encounters through time. Time provides to the pure
concept of the understanding a possible relation to objects. Numerus est
quantitas phaenomenon, sc., per speciem temporis: Number is quantity as it
shows itself in the image of time. It [387] is the concept of the under-
standing that shows up in this way and sensibilizes itself in this way. Or,
to express the same thing from the standpoint of what shows up as a
concrete thing, i.e., from the standpoint of the appearances: Number is
the condition of the possibility of a determinability of the given by way
of an a priori concept—in this case, the concept of quantity.

§33. Sensation as the schema of reality
The second schema, which Kant interprets with a certain thorough-
ness, is the schema of reality. (“Reality” is the first category within the
second set of categories, which Kant designates as “quality.” With that,
we see the direct connection of these concepts and the source of He-
gel’s way of expressing himself, where reality and quality and exis-
tence are equally united.)

137. [Moser (p. 776.27-28) has “Sich-zahlen-koénnende,” instead of GA 21’s “das
sich zahlende Seiende.” ]

138. [Moser (p.776.21) has Mefbarkeit instead of Messung.|
320 Part II

The schema of reality is sensation, sensatio. In this schema—i.e., in
this synthesis speciosa temporis—what is pre-viewed in the pre-view is
reality. So we have a synthesis speciosa temporis secundum realitatem [syn-
thesis that forms an image of time corresponding to reality]. And here
again, the schema is nothing but a rule for a real thing being able to
appear in and through the image of time: per speciem temporis.

But what is meant by reality as a pure concept of understanding,
prior to sensibilization? Kant says that reality is “what corresponds to a
sensation in general” (B 182). Reality “indicates” something present “in
time.” Something present, as present in time, is present for a while. The
question, “For how long a while?” or more precisely, “How long a while
is the time [of its presence]?” or “Is that ‘while’ determined?” —all are,
a priori, a matter of indifference. This present thing (which has a “while”
of this or that length) is related to its “while” (however long or short it
may be) by filling up a period of time. It is the present, real something,
that fills up that period of time. And that something which, as a present
“what,” fills up a certain length of time is what Kant calls a res, a “some-
thing,” a “thing” in the broadest sense. The essence of this res, this
thing—i.e., its reality, or as Kant says, [388] “thing-ness” [Sachheit]—
consists in the fact that it is a filler-of-time. The question now is how
time functions as a pure image in the schema of reality (and thus in
sensation), or: how time sensibilizes the concept of the understanding
called “reality.”

Time again is to be taken preliminarily as the pure multiplicity of
the now-sequence. However, in the synthesis speciosa secundum reali-
tatem [synthesis that provides an image corresponding to reality], this
pure multiplicity of the now-sequence is to be taken in another per-
spective. Every now is of the same kind as every other now, while, at the
same time, being this now. But also, every now is essentially now-
something, now-something-else,'*”? prescinding from what the “some-
thing” or “something-else” is and even from that the fact that this
something is a “this.” (Just to briefly note this in passing: You can al-
ready see that the first schematism, the now-this, in a certain sense
presupposes—or in any case, is co-original with—this second schema-
tism, i.e., this now-structure where every now is a now-something.)
In the present case it is a matter of highlighting the now insofar as the
now is understood as a now-something. But even a now-nothing is a
now-something—that is, the now-nothing is a privation of a now-
something. A now-nothing is possible only on the basis of the now in
general, which is, in its essence, a now-something.

139. [The German Jetzt-Das might be rendered as “now-this,” however, that
would confuse Jetzt-Das and Jetzt-Dieses; hence, I render Jetzt-Das as “now-some-
thing” and (when it is repeated) “now-something-else.” |
§33. Sensation as the schema of reality 32]

For Kant this res or “something” that shows up in every now is the
sensation, because sensation in general is the first-thing-given—in the
Kantian-Cartesian sense of first-thing-given for inner sense. This res—
this “something,” this “whatever-is-given,” this “present-first-of-all” —
this is what Kant also calls “transcendental matter.” The fact that the
schema of reality is sensation—which at first blush astounds us, and
might seem completely unintelligible—is connected with the specific
position of Descartes and with the specific conception of what is given
first of all.

But every sensation, as Kant says, has a magnitude. That is, every
“something,” every res, is something-present-now—now, and again
now, and again now, and then no more. Every something that shows
every now-moment is only for a while, for a certain sequence of nows.
A certain period of time belongs to the res. [389] A “while” belongs to
a res, and with that a determinate quantity—a this-much, i.e., a quan-
tum of nows—belongs to the determination of reality itself. Accord-
ingly, a certain highlighting of the nows underlies the act of sensation,
so that the nows are understood, more or less explicitly, as countable
and counted nows. But these highlighted, countable nows are thereby
understood primarily as now-something, i.e., as a now that as such
shows a “what” and a “something.” But what is primary in the time-
determination of this particular schema—i.e., in sensation—is not the
counting-off of the nows. Rather, it is the highlighting of the nows as
now-somethings—i.e., a highlighting of the nows which counts the
nows as a group, a highlighting in which the “something” of these
nows maintains itself throughout, i.e., perdures.

In the counted-through nows, which are always now-somethings,
the present thing, as something that perdures, is able to meet the
senses. Here the time-determination qua highlighting-of-the-nows, is
carried out secundum realitatem [in accordance with reality]. It is not a
production of time, as in the case with number; rather, as Kant says,
in this case the time-determination is the filling-up of time. Time-fill-
ing means nothing but letting something encounter us in a counted-
through now-sequence. The counting need not be explicit. It can also
remain undetermined. This synthesis speciosa that is the schema of qual-
ity, is, as Kant says, “the synthesis of sensation (perception) with the
presentation of time” (B 184).

As you see, that is once again a very rough and easily misunder-
stood expression of the synthesis we are talking about. But our previ-
ous interpretation of the structure can clarify this expression in its
proper sense. The now, if it is essentially a now-something, must be
highlighted in order for there to be anything like sensing and a sen-
sible at all. Sensatio as the schema of reality is a matter of letting some-
thing be present—a letting that simultaneously highlights time and
322 Part II
counts through it. It is the condition for the possibility of there being
anything present at all.

The function of the now in time-filling is different from its function
in time-production (number). Moreover, in the schema of reality—
namely, filling-up-a-certain-period-of-time—the now is also some-
thing quantitatively determined and determinable. Therefore the
schema [390] of reality likewise entails the possible countability of
the nows'° and, with that, the presupposition of number and, with
that, the schema of quantity. This connection is intrinsically plain and
clear, if one considers that
1. the schematism is indeed centered on the question of how the con-

cepts of the understanding can have relations to appearances through

the elapsing of time;

2. the appearances present nature; and therefore

3. the entities to which the concepts of the understanding are related,
are understood from the start in terms of a measuring and deter-
mining in scientific knowledge, i.e., physics.

Thus we see a remarkable linking of the schema of reality with
the schema of quantity. Kant did not express himself any further on
the point. That would not have been possible for him because of the
fact that he strung together the categories and, correspondingly, the
schemata as well, in an artificially construed table that necessarily
had to cover-over the inner, material connection of the categories as
well as the schemata. On a closer look there is not a founding con-
nection in the sense that the schema of reality would be founded in
that of quantity. Instead it is the other way around. Or more pre-
cisely, both are co-original—and both are founded in the schema
that Kant puts in third place: the schema of substance, i.e., of
purdurance.

The characterization of these two schematisms already shows that
the now and the pure sequence of nows can be seen in the synthesis
speciosa temporis in various ways, and therefore that the now-structure
is richer than one has generally believed up until now and than Kant
himself explicitly saw. The various modes of the synthesis speciosa tem-
poris are differentiated precisely by the fact that they prescind in vari-
ous ways from the full now-structure, and make use only of a specific
structural moment of the now. [391]

140. [Literally: “. . . and so in the schema of reality there likewise lies the char-
acter of the possible countability of nows.. .”]
§34. Persistence as the schema of substance 323
§34. Persistence as the schema of substance

The third schema that Kant discusses is the schema of substance, and
he formulates it as persistence, or more precisely, as the persistent, the
perdurabile. The persistent is that in which substance shows up: the
persistent is the temporal image of this category. This schema is the
rule governing the showing-up of a persistent real thing. This rule is,
once again, a transcendental time-determination; and so it is a high-
lighting of the now-sequence with regard to substance as the under-
lying. But here again, time itself is not thematic. Instead, what stands
in view here in the categorial pre-view of substance is, as before, the
sequence of nows, which, according to its essence, is “now-something,”
now-something-else ... That means:

e this “something” that shows up in the pure image of the sequence
of nows with regard to the “under-lying” [sub-stance],

e this “something,” as that which under-lies in every now, or more
exactly, as that which under-lies every particular “something” that
can be intended in any now,

e this pre-eminent “something” as the under-lying in and for every
now, is, in every now, the ever-continuing, persistent under-lying."!

This permanent something that is and shows up as the “there” [das

Da] in every now is, for that very reason, always already “there” [da]

for every now that comes along. It is the unchangeable, the constantly

already-present. It is that in terms of which every determinable “this”
of a determinate now is a priori determined. The phrase, “Now, when
this or that specific thing happens . . .” means exactly the same as:

“Now, when nature itself is always already present as that wherein the

specific event is occurring.”

Kant’s explanation of this schema is noticeably briefer than his ex-
planations of the previous two schemata. Besides, the proper features
of this schema, both as a schema and as a rule, remain undetermined.
That is, it does not emerge how we are to understand the synthesis spe-
ciosa temporis that is proper to this schema. He does not tell us what
corresponds to this schema the way time-production and time-fulfill-
ing correspond, respectively, to the previous two schemata. We look in
vain for a delineation of the time-feature corresponding to substance.
In his summarizing characterization of the schemata, [392] Kant
merely says that this schema would present “the relations of percep-
tions among themselves at all time (i.e., in accordance with a rule of

141. [Following Moser, p. 783.22-25: “ausgezeichnete; ist.” ]
324 Part II

time-determination)” (B 184). From that it is easy to gather that the
synthesis speciosa temporis of substance is related to time in the sense of
the whole of time.

We must remember that the same connection was mentioned in the
demonstration of the First Analogy. There it was a question of the pro-
duction of the a priori condition of possibility of an empirical time-
determination. But these a priori conditions for an empirical time-
determination—i.e., the three Analogies—are, for their part, possible
only if their own possibility is already demonstrated—i.e., only if it is
shown beforehand and in general that, as an action of the understand-
ing, determining qua determining can relate to appearances. The con-
dition of possibility for principles of empirical time-determination is
the schematism of the understanding itself.

These connections between (1) empirical time-determination, (2)
the principles, i.e., the Analogies as the principles of the pure determi-
nation of time, and (3) the schematism, which alone is supposed to
make possible this pure time-determination, are obscured in Kant by
the fact that he uses the term “time-determination” in various senses.
The expression and what it means have their origin in the empirical
time-determination, which we understand as time-reckoning—i.e., as a
measuring and determining of an appearance’s being-in-time. That is to
be distinguished from the a priori time-determination; but even this lat-
ter term has many meanings. In one case it means the relation of the
synthesis speciosa temporis to time; and just as there are various categories,
so there are various time-determinations, as synthesis speciosa, that cor-
respond to them. These time-determinations of the synthesis speciosa are
what we characterize as the specifically schematic time-determinations.
They belong to the schema—i.e., the figurative time-determinations.
Among these, there is a time-determination that belongs to substance;
that is the one whose conception we are striving for, although Kant left
it undetermined. However, from the demonstration of the First [393]
Analogy, we could gather that this specific figurative time-determination
is the presupposition for what Kant, in the First Analogy, formulates as
a principle, and which he once again calls a time-determination. This
one is also a priori, but in the a priori ordering of the figurative time-
determinations it is given a subordinate rank. Time-determination in
this third and last sense is an a priori principle that underlies every em-
pirical'*? time-measurement; but as such, an a priori principle is itself
possible only on the basis of a referability of the concepts of the under-
standing to appearances in general.

In terms of their content, the three Analogies belong with the sche-
mata of the three categories of relation—i.e., of the three categories of

142. [Following Moser, p. 786.13-14.]
§34. Persistence as the schema of substance 325
substance, causality, and reciprocal action [between agent and patient] —
which Kant treats very briefly, as in fact he does with the three catego-
ries of modality and their schemata. The fact that the Analogies and the
concepts are treated separately (and in general, the very conception of
the problem of schematism) is dictated simply by the architectonics of
the book. Kant first discusses his doctrine of the concept, then his doc-
trine of the proposition and conclusion. But the result is that here (as in
other parts of the Critique of Pure Reason) there emerge substantive issues
that lack any support.—For our present treatment, we must always re-
member: The term “time-determination” has many meanings, and the
individual meanings are themselves insufficiently determined, which
in turn contributes to their ambiguity.'”

* * *

It is unclear how we should understand the structure of the figurative
time-determination of substance. At any rate, Kant furnishes no indi-
cation in that regard. That is all the more serious insofar as the figura-
tive time-determination of substance is, as one can show, the most
fundamental one—an insight that is not only covered-over in Kant
but also kept out of the picture by the extraneous architectonics of the
Table of Judgments and the Table of the Categories.

We must try to get clear about the central and substantive meaning
of this schema and of the time-determination that belongs to it. So,
what kind of feature does this synthesis speciosa temporis secundum sub-
stantiam have? What is it in this category that corresponds to the mode
of the figurative time-determination? What corresponds to time-pro-
duction and time-filling? In the passage we already referred to (B
184-185), Kant says: the a priori, rule-governed time-determination
[394] that belongs to substance concerns the order of time; that of
time-production concerns the time-series [i.e., quantity]; that of time-
filling concerns the content of time [i.e., quality]; and that of the cate-
gory of modality, concerns the ensemble of time. From this as well, little
can be gathered, especially since Kant does not say how the time-se-
ries and the order of time differ from each other. But clearly by “the
order of time” Kant means the reckoning of the order of time, i.e.,
empirical time-reckoning.

This schema of substance also includes a special relation to time
insofar as, in it, the figurative time-determination is supposed to make
possible not the ability to be sensed and counted, but the ability to
reckon time itself: empirical time-determinability. This schema is sup-

143. [Here Heidegger ends his lecture of Tuesday, 23 February 1926, to be followed
by his lecture of Thursday, 25 February, which opened with a 400-word summary
(clarifying the four kinds of time-determination) which is omitted in GA 21.]
326 Part II

posed to make possible an appearance in a way that makes the appear-
ance be objectively determinable in a temporal way. In other words, it
makes possible counting-up the amount of nows of the duration of a
specific real thing. Its job is to make possible the objective determina-
tion of the nows of a real thing’s duration in terms of its “how much.”
That necessarily requires, as we showed earlier, the ability to return to
something that is already constantly there. That means always already
having constant access to whatever is there. The synthesis speciosa tem-
poris secundum substantiam is nothing but the rule for a priori already
and constantly having access to something unchangeable. In other
words, it is the rule for letting a self-same something encounter us in
every something that is now already present. Accordingly, this schema
includes a certain time-filling, a certain time-determination for the
category “reality.” But this time-filling is not for a determinate dura-
tion, throughout a determinate number of nows. Rather, this is time-
filling in the form of letting-something-encounter-us in every now—
which entails: for every time-filling in the sense of the category of
reality, for all of the prior, constant letting-the-unchangeable-encoun-
ter. In a certain way, by means of this time-filling we can help with
the determining-feature of the synthesis speciosa temporis secundum sub-
stantiam that is lacking in Kant. We comprehend it as a preeminent
[form of] time-filling, viz., ever-prior time-filling as the rule of every
specific possible real [395] time-measurement, i.e., of every reckoning
and determining of the magnitude of a real thing.

But now we see anew a connection between the three categories or,
if you will, their schemata. It is obvious that with the schema of sub-
stance we have arrived at what really sustains the other two that we
mentioned before.

The fact that Kant did not see the fundamental meaning of the
schema of substance—indeed that (as we have shown) he left this time-
determination remarkably obscure—is the clearest indication that for
him the structure of ur-temporality in general remains hidden in prin-
ciple. But on the other hand, highlighting ur-temporality, as over against
Kant’s doctrine of schematism and time in general, will make it clear
that ur-temporality is not something invented or contrived but a field of
work in which fundamental distinctions are made.

The rest of the schemata are treated only in brief fashion. This is not
the place to show how Kant would have understood each individual
synthesis speciosa temporis, or even how he would have spelled out the
connection of these various syntheses according to their own struc-
ture rather than in the extraneous way he lists them in his artificially
constructed Table. As regards the connection of the schemata of rela-
tion (substance, causality, reciprocal action) with those of modality
(possibility, actuality, necessity) there are insuperable difficulties, be-
§34. Persistence as the schema of substance 327
cause here Kant allows the borders between the two to completely
hemorrhage into each other. He says that the schema of modality ex-
presses the relation to “time itself as the correlate of the determination
of ...an object” (B 184). By contrast, he also says: “Persistence {and
therefore the schema of substance} gives general expression to time, as
the constant correlate of all existence of appearances” (B 266). Thus
the same time-relation is claimed for the schema of modality as for the
schema of a specific category of relation, that of substance. The root of
these inadequacies lies not only in [396] the schematism, but in the
division and derivation of the categories themselves and in their
source—the Table of Judgments—whose artificial and incidental na-
ture is shown in a remarkable way within an investigation that con-
stantly asks for the final conditions of possibility.

We shall not go any further into the chapter on schematism itself.
As regards its literary character, it is not well unified. The first sections
(B 176-179) provide an insufficiently researched interpretation of
schematism in the form of a popular-philosophical explanation of
what should be explained throughout the whole of the Transcenden-
tal Logic. In fact, Kant carries out this rather pedantic explanation by
following out the idea of subsumption, which of course is of funda-
mental importance for the architectonic of the Critique of Pure Reason
(and therefore also for its dubious explanations).

It is no accident that Kant hit upon subsumption in this propaedeu-
tic explanation of the schematism, since for Kant subsumption co-
heres in an essential way with the structure of the synthesis and of
judgment. In general, judgment is only subsumption. To be sure, he
did not clarify the structure of subsumption as regards its inner con-
nection with the structure of the synthesis speciosa temporis. The useful-
ness of the idea of subsumption for Kant was abetted by the fact that
he conceives of the a priori in a Cartesian sense.

The first one to show this duality in the composition of the chapter
on schematism was Robert Curtius in his essay on “Das Schematis-
muskapitel in der Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Philologische Untersuchung”
[The Chapter on Schematism in the Critique of Pure Reason. A Philologi-
cal Investigation], in Kant-Studien 19 (1914), pp. 338-366. The subtitle
indicates his goal: not a philosophical interpretation, but a clarifica-
tion of its literary character. Curtius distinguishes in Kant a synthesis
of subsumption and a synthesis of the schematism.'** Only the sche-
matism of synthesis has any substantive meaning, and it coheres with
the problematic of the Critique of Pure Reason, especially with the time-

144. [Moser (p. 793.17-18) records Heidegger saying, “the subsumption-
schematism and the synthesis-schematism,” and two sentences later: “The sche-
matism, as the synthesis-schematism, is the presupposition for. . .”]
328 Part II

based deduction of the categories. [397] But we need to say more. The
schematism-synthesis is the presupposition for the ur-temporal de-
duction of the categories, a presupposition which Kant obviously clari-
fied only much later and which he never understood radically as a
presupposition. Further, we have to emphasize what Curtius did not
adequately valorize: that for Kant subsumption and synthesis in gen-
eral are equally essential, in keeping with the theory of judgment and
concept that Kant took over from the tradition.'”

However, that belongs in a thematic interpretation of Kant. We are
asking about the phenomenon of time itself and, after that, about how
time is understood in the doctrine of the schematism. We now ask: By
what right did we say at the beginning of our interpretation of Kant’s
conception of time, that he held fast—indeed, in principle—to the tradi-
tional concept of time (viz., time as now-time), and that he nonetheless
pushed out beyond it toward a philosophical understanding of time,
thereby touching a boundary but never getting beyond it into the
open?

§35. The time-determination of the synthesis speciosa
We must keep in mind this fundamental fact: Even in a very advanced
philosophical understanding of time, time is always understood in
terms of the now. Therefore the following consideration, which is
meant to lead us into the dimension of ur-temporality, must remain
oriented to the phenomenon of the now.

1. In the previous determinations of time (production of time, time-
filling, and ever-prior time-filling), time and therefore the now are
not thematically comprehended. Therefore, they also are not deter-
mined in some way like being counted up and measured in answer to
the question, “How much time has gone by?” Therefore, here time is
not the time of the appearances. Rather, it is time in relation to the I-
think itself—the spontaneous synthesis of the imagination.'*° For the
first time in philosophy, time is taken in its transcendental function
within the a priori constitution of the whole of transcendental [398]
truth, i.e., of that which positively determines the possibility of
appearance.

145. [Moser (p. 793.29-794.5) records Heidegger adding: “Insofar as, for Kant,
the idea of subsumption is tightly [eng] connected with the idea of synthesis, in
keeping with his theory of judgment, we cannot easily set the two schematisms
over against each other, despite the poor shape Kant left them in. Rather, we have
to try to point out the inner connection between the two.” ]

146. [This last phrase is from Moser, p. 794.32-795.1.]
§35. Time-determination of synthesis speciosa 329

2. What is the positive characterization of time and of the now that
we should take from the figurative time-determinations? First of all, it
must be made clear that the way the now has been characterized here-
tofore—as something between the not-yet and the no-longer—in no
way touches the decisive aspect. But in the modes of synthesis, a feature
of time is highlighted that was never seen in the usual characterization
of time but that nonetheless was constantly made use of: The now is a
“now-something.” The now speaks, as it were, “away from itself”; it
points toward .. . “now that this-or-that ...,” or simply, “now that...”
Insofar as one says “now,” no matter how undetermined and empty it
might be, the now is, in its essence, a “now that this... ,” a “now that
this or that is encountered,” or “now that this or that happens,” or “now
that I behave in this or that way.” “Now” is essentially “now that this
...” Even a completely isolated “Now!” that one might shout to start a
footrace is a “now that... ,” and in fact this case shows the phenome-
nally primary feature of the now: “from this point on.” We look at a
certain point on the clock, and when the secondhand gets there we
shout “Now!” or “Go!”—meaning, “Now that this [second has been
reached]!” And it need not be a chronometer: any event at all that the
group has agreed on can serve this function.

So when we speak, as we usually do, of an individual “now” in the
sense of a now-point in a series of nows, we don’t really talk about a
“now” but rather use some other expression, like “this thing now”
which stands within a sequence and about which we have to say: “it’s
moving, it’s flowing.” At most, one still has a now-fragment to which
no phenomenological sense pertains. The phenomenon of the now has
already been deprived of its essential structure. And out of a multiplic-
ity of such cut-up nows, we construct for ourselves the idea of time.
Time, then, is something that is somehow “just there”—something
which is given, but whose being we do not determine because we can-
not. Every question about the being of time has [399] already misun-
derstood time. The difficulties that Augustine landed in when he asked
this question (Confessions, book XI) are classic.

This character of “toward something” or “pointing to something”
belongs to the essence of the now. Only by bringing out this character
of the now can we make sense of the synthesis speciosa temporis. To this
end, we have understood the basic structure of the synthesis temporis—
the thesis that this synthesis is about self-referral (in the broadest
sense) to a now; we have understood it as the highlighting of the now
in such a way that the synthesis follows the now-phenomenon. Or
better, it follows its indication, its “direction-toward.” More precisely
yet, the synthesis follows the now’s “that-toward-which”: its “some-
thing,” its “this.” The primary and genuine highlighting of the now is
unthematic: it pursues the now in terms of what the now is in itself,
330 Part II

i.e., in terms of the fact that the now points away from itself. The high-
lighting is not a matter of contemplating this structure, but of follow-
ing it as it points away from itself; and that is where the unthematic
becomes thematic. Thus the various modes of the synthesis speciosa tem-
poris are grounded in the way the unthematic pre-view of the now and
the now-sequence is carried out. Insofar as these syntheses have a
transcendental a priori character, they are antecedent. The syntheses
are modes of the antecedent, unthematic pre-viewing of the pure
now-sequence.

Earlier, however, we used this phenomenon of a prior, unthematic
pre-view to interpret what Kant calls the form of pure intuition. From
this point on, let us try to further clarify the schema of substance in
its character as synthesizing. That wherein substance is sensibly de-
picted is persistence. But according to Kant (B 225-226), persistence
represents time itself. In this synthesis, there occurs a highlighting of
the whole sequence of nows. In other words, the “something” to which
every now points is understood as the “something” in every now, “at
all times.” Here the synthesis speciosa relates antecedently and unthe-
matically to the whole of time; and so here the pure image of time
shows up most purely. This corresponds to the fact that, since antiq-
uity, substance has been understood as the basic category. The schema
of substance is therefore the most original and most pure in its [400]
pre-viewing of the whole of time with regard to its pure character of
referring to the “something” as the same at all times, that is, for the
whole of time. Therefore, the mode of this most original synthesis spe-
ciosa is the prior and constant allowing of the same to encounter us.
This preeminent, prior, unthematic taking-a-look is the primary a
priori constitution of what Kant calls the form of intuition.'*” Thus that
which shows up in the Transcendental Aesthetic seemingly formally
and generally as a characterization of time is now uncovered as the
fundamental and first synthesis speciosa temporis.

§36. The now-structure that we have attained: its character

of referral and of making present. The phenomenal
demonstrability and limits of Kant’s interpretation of time

According to Kant, to intuit this form, this pure pre-viewing of the
sequence of nows (which is to be understood in the phenomenologi-
cally clarified sense of the now), is time itself. Time as this pre-view-
ing is related (unthematically) to time as the pure sequence of nows,

147. [Reading “mit Form der Anschauung” (Moser, p. 799.13), instead of “mit
Form anzuschauen.” |
§36. The now-structure we have attained 331
to such a degree that time itself—the antecedent, constant letting-
something-encounter—is itself given, although unthematically. Be-
cause it is an unthematic relation to itself, time as the antecedent-
constant letting-something-encounter-us lets the “something” be
encountered as the self-same at all times.

Only when one holds fast to the genuine now-structure and observes
that the primary taking-a-look at time is unthematic, does one under-
stand what it means to say: time is an original pure and general self-
affection. What does the affecting—namely, the now-sequence whose
nows the taking-a-look pursues unthematically—is not something just-
there, thematically comprehended and comprehensible. Rather, the
now-sequence affects in such a way that it lets something be seen—but
unthematically, as if the now-sequence itself were constantly retreating
and disappearing in its constant referring-to. [401] This affecting is thus
something like a constant putting-itself-aside and a liberating letting-
something-be-seen. And the unthematic act of affecting on the part of
that which affects is enacted by the very one affected. In other words,
this constant, prior letting-something-encounter, this unthematic high-
lighting of the now as we characterized it above, is the pure act of ren-
dering something present [Gegenwartigen]. The now is a now-present
[Gegenwart]. It is a referring to ..., whereby it lets something encounter
us and whereby it awaits something that can encounter. And the now is
a now-present in such a way that it remains unthematic. Likewise, the
pre-view of the now is unthematic. It is a letting-something-encounter-
us—i.e., a making-present—that passes through the now. The now is
neither a fragment nor a chopped-up now-point that is “merely-pres-
ent,” but rather a pointing-toward-something, a letting-something-be-
seen. It is neither a fragment nor generally something merely-there, but
rather the basic structure of the very act of relating in the Kantian con-
text of the knowledge of nature.

More precisely: Making-present is first of all a condition of the pos-
sibility that a “now” can become explicit as “now something” and
“now something else.” Knowledge of nature (for example) is a specifi-
cally articulated way of making-present, and making-present charac-
terizes human existence in its being-in-the-world. Only for those rea-
sons can this human existence say “now this, now that,” when it
speaks about the world and about nature (although always, as it does
so, co-expressing itself, its ownmost being unto the world). Above all,
on the basis of this essential expressibility of the “now-something”
can the “now something, now something else” be highlighted as a
pure sequence—indeed as a pure sequence of blind nows, the pure
multiplicity of which is the primary understanding of time in the tra-
dition, as well as in Kant. When we say “now,” what we are talking
about with that “now” is not something just-there, as if I were talking
332 Part II

about the now as if it were like a chair or table. When I say “now,” I'll

never find anything in the range of the merely-present that corre-

sponds to what the now itself is. Likewise, in saying “now,” I am not
talking about something “inner,” like an act of will or a state of mind

or anything at all that occurs in the soul. [402] By the word “now” I

neither name nor speak of anything at all that is just-there. Rather,

with that “now” human existence expresses itse/f/ not as something
just-there but itself in its being unto the world, i.e., in the basic form
of this being unto the world: the act of making-present.

Now we must try to bring out this connection between the now and
the (now-)present in order to see:

¢ how the “I think” comes to an original connection with time;

e how the basic function of the “I think” (namely, the “I combine”) is
thereby unveiled in its primary time-character;

e and how the temporality of the basic structure of the statement—
speaking of something as something—is demonstrated in its ur-
temporal meaning.'*8

* * *

What gets expressed in the now is the present [Gegenwart]. The present,

which is a matter of letting-something-encounter-us, is not itself present

[anwesend], it is not something just-there. The present is only a making-

present [Gegenwart ist nur gegenwartig|, making-present as a comport-

ment. Making-present primarily expresses the being of human exis-
tence as being-unto-the-world. This being unto the world is not a mode
of being to which there can be added the property of making-present;
rather, the present [Gegenwart] is primarily the condition of the possibil-
ity of a being-familiar-with-the-world [eines Seins bei der Welt]. Making-
present is (primarily) a factical presenting [Gegenwart], which, in this
active and transitive sense, is a concept that pertains to the very struc-
ture of human existence and in fact expresses the meaning of the being

[of human existence] and primarily of its being in the world. We desig-

nate the ever-temporal [jeweilige], authentic ontological possibility of

factical human existence (however that possibility be chosen and deter-
mined) as Existenz. All the structures and interpretations of the being of
human existence take their orientation from Existenz. Likewise, all the
specific structural concepts that express the being of human existence

148. [Here (Moser, p. 803) Heidegger ends his lecture of Thursday, 25 February

1926, to be followed by his final lecture, that of Friday, 26 February, which opened

with a 35-word introduction that is omitted in GA 21. Soon after this date, Hei-

degger left Marburg for his cabin in Todtnauberg to finish the final draft of Sein
und Zeit. |
§36. The now-structure we have attained 333
we call “existentials.” Making-present, as a structural concept of human
existence, is an existential.

In ordinary usage the word Gegenwart has many meanings. First
and foremost it means: the present-now, i.e., the present moment,
“now”; but also the [403] current epoch, “today.” This meaning can
then be formalized so as to mean “the pure now,” as in the theoretical
explanations of time in Hegel and others. In that case, however, “the
present” means not just “now” or “today” in a concrete sense, but
rather, presence [Anwesenheit]. When we say, “He didn’t want to speak
in the Gegenwart of others,” the phrase “in the Gegenwart” means the
same as “in the Anwesenheit of others.”

But “in the presence of” means something more here. It does not
simply mean: “When so-and-so was simply there with some other people,
this or that happened.” To better understand the meaning of Gegenwart,
consider how the word is used in this example: “In my Gegenwart [usu-
ally: ‘in my presence’] she didn’t dare say that.” It doesn’t mean, “When
I was just there like the furniture and someone else was just there like
a wallflower .. .” No, clearly it means, “in my being present to her and
in her being present to me”—i.e., in our reciprocal making-the-other-
present, in our co-sharing the same world. But the phrase “in my Gegen-
wart” likewise has the sense of “in my Anwesenheit,” i.e., in my shared
existence-with-someone in the same place and at the same spot. These
various meanings of Gegenwart—i.e., the various phenomena the word
designates—are to be interpreted and conceptually understood exclu-
sively as a concept pertaining to the structure of human existence: its
primary orientation to Gegenwart in the sense of making-present.

But that entails the following: If Gegenwart constitutes a mode of
time and, as a mode of time, determines the meaning of the being of
human existence (insofar as human existence is being at home with
the world), then time itself must be understood as the basic existential
of human existence. In that case, time is no longer the name for the
pure multiplicity of the now-sequence; rather, this multiplicity of the
now-sequence is a derivative phenomenon, and it must be possible to
derive it from time as the basic existential, although the reverse is not
possible. This proof of the derivation of time as a [404] multiplicity of
nows from original time as the ontological structure of human exis-
tence must likewise let us justify the legitimacy of the basic structure
of time as an existential.

With regard to the being-structure of being in the world or being
unto the world, making-present is the meaning of the being of human
existence. The traditional conception and determination of time as
now-time is an interpretation of time drawn from making-present
without the latter being understood as an existential. What is authen-
tic and progressive in Kant’s interpretation consists in the fact that it
334 Part II

does not simply attribute time to the subject as the subject’s way of
intuiting, but in addition makes this phenomenon—the act of making-
present—the basis for Kant’s interpretation of knowledge. With regard
to “making-present” as an existential, we can explain the positive and
the detrimental aspects of Kant’s problematic, as well as its limits.

Let us not forget: The primary emphasis on presenting as a mode of
time, still derives from a dependence on the notion of time as the time
of nows. But what we need to show is that presenting is emphatically not
the primary mode of time. There are two senses in which the traditional
notion of time—i.e., understood in terms of the now—is not original:

e It does not touch at all on the sense of time as an existential.
e Moreover, the concept of time as now-time has its source in the
foundational existential mode of time as making-present.

Taking our orientation from time as presenting and from making-
present as the very being of human existence qua being unto its world,
we will now try to discuss briefly the question we formulated earlier
about the relation between time as original pure self-affection and the
“T think” as the spontaneity of apperception.

In formulating the question, we emphasized that time is letting-
ourselves-be-encountered by something present. Time is the pre-
viewing that we characterized, and the pre-viewing is self-affection.
The “I think” is letting something be co-present with the “I think,”
i.e., with the I itself understood as the constant “for-which” that some-
thing present can be present unto. [405] Both of these—time and the
“T think”—are unthematic, both are antecedent (a priori), both are
modes of being of the subject. The question remains: Is time a mode of
the “I think”? Or is the “I think” a mode of time? Or are both of them
modes of a still more original connection?

The question is not advanced by postulating that the “I think” runs
its course “within time,” because then we could ask: If the “I think” is
itself “in time,” how is it supposed to “bring forth” time? (Cf. Uber eine
Entdeckung, vol. 8, p. 221.)"° How can something that is “in time”
“bring forth” time? In addition to being within time, is the self, as this

149. [Uber eine Entdeckung, nach der alle neue Kritik der reinen Vernunft durch eine
dltere entbehrlich gemacht werden soll, in Kant, Akademie-Ausgabe, vol. 8, p. 221. Hei-
degger is referring to Kant’s statement that our faculty of knowledge “bringt sie aus
sich selbst a priori zu Stande,” where sie refers both to the form of things in space and
time and to the synthetic unity of the manifold in concepts. The English translators
render this as “it brings them out of itself a priori”; see “On a Discovery According to
which Any New Critique of Pure Reason Has Been Made Superfluous by an Earlier
One,” in The Kant-Eberhard Controversy, ed. and trans. Henry E. Allison (Baltimore
and London: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1973), p. 135.]
§36. The now-structure we have attained 335
temporal “I think,” also supposed to affect itself and thereby bring
forth time? But on the other hand, for Kant it is equally impossible to
reduce the “I think” to time. So within the self as such, there remains
this aporia of the connection (or lack thereof) between the a-temporal
spontaneity of the “I think” and the spontaneity of self-affection,
which is time itself.

The difficulty is resolved with one blow once we take seriously time
as making-present. The “I think” is not im time (Kant is completely right
to reject that) but is time itself, or more exactly, one mode of time—that
of pure making-present. As pure making-present, human existence it-
self is the “for-which” of whatever it might happen to encounter; and
making-present is human existence’s way of letting-something-en-
counter-it. In making-present (taken in its proper sense), human exis-
tence lets whatever it encounters come toward human existence in such
a way that neither the I becomes an object [Objekt] nor does time (i.e.,
presenting, taken as an existential) become an object [Gegenstand]. Here
again Kant is entirely in the right, phenomenally speaking, when he
underlines the non-objectivity [Nichtobjektivitat und Nichtgegenstdndlich-
keit] of the “I think” and of time. When turned into a positive state-
ment, this is understandable only if time itself is pure making-present,
pure letting-something-encounter. In making-present, human exis-
tence places itself, as it were, purely into presence-unto-whatever, and
it is purely and totally absorbed by the presence-of [Anwesenheit] and its
presenting-of [Gegenwart]. [406] So much is this the case, that time goes
unseen in existence’s absorption in time and in presenting. Rather, ex-
istence simply “sets free” whatever can encounter it in an act of present-
ing and become intelligible as something present [Anwesendes] in the
presenting.

The “I think” as the “for which” of the letting-encounter is time itself
qua pure presenting. Certainly this interpretation essentially goes be-
yond Kant (indeed, back behind him), but not so radically as to aban-
don the path of the phenomenal contexts that Kant himself had in
mind. This claim is documented by a characterization that Kant, in one
passage, gives of the I: “For this constant and enduring I (of pure ap-
perception) constitutes the correlate of all our presentations” (A 123).
But this determination of the I is almost a word-for-word definition of
time, which, according to Kant, absolutely stands and persists and is the
correlate of all appearances in general. When Kant really tries to inves-
tigate the phenomena, he brings time and the “I think” as close together
as possible, so much so that the definitions of both phenomena are, as it
were, co-extensive. Nonetheless, on the basis of a dogma that guides
him, he wrenches time and the “I think” apart and keeps them abso-
lutely separate from each other, so much so that he is a priori certain
that they simply cannot be brought together at all.
336 Part II

If we understand the “I think” as a mode of pure making-present,
and if we understand making-present as the very way-of-being of
human existence qua being-in-the-world, then Kant’s point of depar-
ture is fundamentally modified—in other words, the dogmatic start-
ing-point of the Cartesian position is avoided from the very start. It is
not the case that an “I think” is first given as the purest a priori, and
then some “time” is added as the mediating point for the [I think] to
come out to a world. Rather, the very being of the subject gua human
existence is being-in-the-world, and human existence’s being-in-the-
world is possible only because the basic structure of its being is time
itself, specifically here in the mode of making-present. [407]

Further: The “I think” (i.e., the pure formal combining of the pure
understanding) is, for its part, simply a free and emptied-out mode of
making-something-present—but not that the “I think” is the primary
element that must first relate itself to time, and in this relating consti-
tute a being unto the world.

The pure, unconstrained making-present—the “I combine” —is the
autonomous but derivative [abkiinftige| mode of an original making-
present on the part of factical existence itself. As pure and free mak-
ing-present, it is accordingly a mode of time—or more precisely, a
mode of human existence’s temporality—wherein time empties itself
into the pure, free making-present of whatever-there-is. But insofar as
presenting is still a mode of time, it is time in the full sense. The gen-
esis of pure and unconstrained making-present from out of everyday
being unto the world is what we have characterized as absorption in
the world. It is nothing but the structure of the modification of the
being of human existence in which human existence forms within
itself the ontological mode of free, theoretical observation which, for
its part, can be formalized into a mere “intending-something” in an
“T-relate-to.” The ontological transition from the pre-theoretical rela-
tion to the world, to a pure [theoretical] making-present, is itself a
mode of temporality—and it would be absolutely impossible if human
existence were not itself time.

By contrast, Kant attempts to go from the empty “I combine” to
what we comprehend, as follows: As being-in-the-world, we have
opened up the world and are with entities that encounter us in the
environment and that we know as nature. This “we know nature” is
the phenomenal starting point of the problematic of the Critique of Pure
Reason, and Kant’s problem is the possibility of this “we know nature”
(even though he precisely overlooks the problem of the inter-subjec-
tivity of the “we know nature”). The highest point from which Kant
will seek to understand this possibility is the “I think”; but this high-
est point is questionable in the highest degree. It becomes possible as
§37. Time as an existential of human existence 337
his starting-point only because of the fact that Kant orients himself
dogmatically in terms of Descartes, and at the same time in terms of
the idea of [408] of a certain preeminence of formal logic—of the “I
combine” and its possible modes.

Certainly, Kant does not simply deduce the “we know nature” from
the empty “I combine”; rather, here he must slip in, as it were, the a
priori of time as an essential factor. Time (understood as the autono-
mous multiplicity of a now-sequence) has to function as that which is
given a priori. And so, even though Kant attributes time to the subject,
time in a certain sense comes to the subject enigmatically from out-
side. It is there as something already given, a blind factum pre-given for
the spontaneity of thinking, which itself stands outside time. Let us
prescind from Kant’s dogmatic motivations: the major thing that pre-
vented him from seeing the time-character of the “I think” is found in
his inadequate interpretation of time itself. Although he makes use of
the more original structures of the now in his schematism, in his the-
ory Kant always takes the now and the now-sequence in the sense of
the traditional conception of time. “In his theory” means: in the inad-
equately clarified theoretical orientation of the connection between
time as intuition and the spontaneity of the “I think” in the concep-
tion of the ontological wholeness of the self.

Kant could interpret the knowledge of nature only in such a way that
he discovered time within the very structure of cognition itself. Time is
not just the form within which the act of cognition runs its course. No,
it belongs to the very act of cognition. But on the other hand, the pre-
dominance of the traditional concept of time—time as that within
which something runs its course—hinders Kant from seeing the struc-
ture of time (which he makes use of in the schematism) in its funda-
mental significance as the structure of human existence itself. [409]

§37. Time as an existential of human existence—
temporality and the structure of care.
The statement as a making-present
Our construal of Kant’s conception and interpretation of time should
have made it concretely clear that time functions in the being of
human existence (and, in the present case, first of all in knowledge)
structurally and not marginally. With that, however, we have also dem-
onstrated the possibility of a different understanding of time, and we
have already sketched out its most proximate positive determinations.
And taking that as our starting point, we are finally in a position to
answer our initial question—the question about the time-character of
338 Part II

any statement concerning “world.” We understand “statement” as a
comportment of human existence unto the world. It!*° conceals within
itself the fundamental question: the question about the ur-temporality
of human existence itself as being unto the world.

We have characterized being unto the world as concern [Besorgen];
and the essential structure of concern is care [Sorge]. We established
that care is the being-structure of human existence as such, and in turn
we explained this structure of care as being-already-ahead-of-oneself-
as-being-already-familiar-with-the-world [Sich-selbst-vorweg-schon-sein-
bei-der-Welt]. We have previously discussed the character of “ahead” and
of “already” with regard to their possible time-sense; the result was sim-
ply negative. These time-features cannot mean anything like being-in-
time—a determinate form of the mere thereness of something that is
merely-there: (1) because they themselves are features of a structure
that has nothing to do with the mere-thereness that characterizes the
world and nature; and in addition (2) because this structure is the on-
tological structure of that entity the meaning of whose being has abso-
lutely nothing to do with something merely-present. And yet, on the
other hand, the features of human existence that are in question here—
the “ahead” and the “already”— obviously do have time-features.

In what sense is the being-structure of human existence—care—
characterized by time? It is not the case that these structures—over
and above what they are in themselves—are “also” in time and in some
kind of relation to time. Rather, care is determined “by” time in such
a way that care itself is time. Care is the very facticity of time. [410]

Temporality is the ground of the possibility of these structures of care
itself. The “ahead-of-itself” is a mode of time, but not in the sense of
mere presence within time. Thus time is not the kind of being that befits
some entity that is merely-present.’*' It simply “is” not; its being is not a
determinate kind of being, it is not the being of some entity. Rather, it is
the condition of possibility of the fact that there is being (not entities).
Time does not have the kind of being of any other thing; rather, time
[constantly] unfolds [zeitigt].1°? And this unfolding constitutes the tem-
porality of time. The “ahead-of-itself” is a mode in which time unfolds.

When we make statements such as “Time is that or that” and “Time
is temporal,” the word “is” has the sense of a specifically phenomeno-
logical-categorial positing which, insofar as it states anything, must

150. [The word “it” (sie) could refer to any of three elements of the previous
sentence—namely, “the fundamental question about the time-character,” or any
“statement about ‘world’,” or “world” itself. Moser (p. 812.23-24) shows that “it”
refers to “a comportment of human existence toward the world.” ]

151. [Moser, p. 813.26-28.]

152. [For Heidegger the verb zeitigen connotes unfolding from out of itself
(votc).]
§37. Time as an existential of human existence 339
have the structure of a statement about the world. But its primary
sense qua statement is not a matter of pointing out something that is
merely-present, but rather, is a matter of letting human existence be
understood. All statements about the being of human existence, all
propositions about time, all propositions within the problematic of the
essence of ur-temporality have, as expressed propositions, the charac-
ter of indication. But they indicate only human existence, even though,
as expressed propositions, they nonetheless first refer to something
merely-present.!** They indicate human existence and the structures
of human existence and of time. They indicate the possible under-
standing of the structure of human existence, and, to the degree that
it is available in such understanding, the possible conceptualizability
of that structure. (Insofar as these propositions are indicative of a
éQurvevetv, they have the character of hermeneutic indication.) [411]
By their very meaning, statements about time are never statements
about the world; but first and foremost, we do operate within the ori-
entation and mind-set [Verstehenstendenz] of statements about the
world. And to that extent, when statements deal with time, time is
rendered inaccessible in its proper temporality. What gets formed is a
concept of time by which temporality is not so much determined or
even just indicated, but rather is covered-over, so much so that even
the possibility of understanding time differently is disavowed. The
abiding example of this orientation in interpreting time is the first
philosophical interpretation of time that we have: that of Aristotle.

But the difficulty in apprehending time goes hand-in-hand with
the peculiar temporality of time itself: the fact that first and foremost
time conceals itself and gets recognized only in and as the non-au-
thentic forms it takes. We look at the world and find that time is that
within which all processes run their course. Whenever we try to un-

153. A worldly statement about something present, even when it is performed
as a simple naming, can refer directly to the said. On the other hand, a statement
about human existence as well as every statement about being (every statement
about the categorial), in order to be intelligible, requires an overhaul and reorga-
nization of the understanding in terms of what the statement is pointing out. In
the aforementioned cases, what is being pointed out is, by its very essence, never
something present.

The difference between a statement about the categorial and a statement about
things that are present in the world remained hidden for the Greeks—for Plato as well
as Aristotle—and all statements were understood as statements directly about the
world. For that reason it has happened that being itself, insofar as it came into view,
was conceived of as an entity. The hiddenness of this difference [between the two
kinds of statement] and the hiddenness of the corresponding ways of talking about
and interpreting [the two kinds of statements] is one of the roots of the split between
Aristotelian metaphysics as a pure formal ontology and as a theology of vouc.
340 Part II

derstand time more originally, it is time conceived in this way—“world-
time”—that guides all further explanations. In this way, we either do
not see time at all or we see time only as a mode of what is just out-
there, namely, the world or nature.

Because this understanding of time is close at hand and dominant,
from the very beginning all the essential modes of time—present, past,
future—get their temporal meanings fixed in terms of this understand-
ing of time. Asa result, these modes, in their everyday meaning, are not
only unusable but also misleading. Thus “future” means: the time that
is coming, the nows that are not yet here on hand but that are on their
way. Let us consider those [future] nows in whose still-coming time
something “is.” When it comes to an entity that “is” at that time which
is still to come, we say, “It will be.” But this future—a now that is not yet
present—is simply not the authentic future in terms of which time is
properly temporal, any more than the isolated and delimited now that
is present here is the real presenting in the sense of making-present, as
we explicated it above. [In the dominant understanding,] the now is
the present moment, and [412] from Aristotle to Hegel the now was
understood as that which is directly present in a privileged way.

Correspondingly, “future” means: the coming presence [Anwesen-
heit] of the now, a possible present moment in the sense just indicated.
In this view, the now is understood as something within time, conse-
quently something that the temporality of time cannot explain. But in
fact, the future is not a determination of the possible presence of the
now. Presence is possible only in and through the making-present of
something that is first articulable through a presenting. And in the
same way, the future, understood as something present-qua-coming,
is possible only in an expecting [Gewdrtigen]. Such expecting, under-
stood as “letting something come toward oneself,” first makes possible
something arriving—a possible now that is arriving.'**

Expecting, like making-present, is a mode of the being of human
existence. And every form of expecting understands whatever it (qua
expectation) relates to as something that possibly can be present. It un-
derstands its expecting as the expecting of a [future] making-present of

154. [Moser (p. 816.25-817.6) records Heidegger saying here, and in place of the
next paragraph: “Only in expecting is something futural [Zukiinftiges]—or to be
more precise, is the future of the futural—possible. Expecting, like making-pres-
ent, is a mode of the being of human existence. All expecting relates itself at the
same time to..., or more precisely, is understood as an expecting that intends a
making-present. Expecting qua ‘letting something come toward oneself’ means
letting it come toward oneself as a possible making-present of something. To ex-
pect something that is coming means to understand the coming something as
something that can be present. And so expecting includes an intrinsic relation to
a possible making-something-present.” ]
§37. Time as an existential of human existence 34]
something. Expecting is letting something come toward oneself as a pos-
sible making-present. All expecting of a [future] making-present is also
the expectation (in addition, but just as originally) of something.

Expecting, as the expecting of a making-present, is referred (the way
that making-present is) to the life-world of one’s practical concerns.’
From the start, human existence is held in an encountering concern for
what can be produced, used, and procured—in the broadest sense, for
what it can be concerned with. But concern, as absorption in the world
of one’s concerns, is always and essentially (as we showed earlier) a
shared-concern of human existence itself. In each of its concerns,
human existence itself, as regards its ability, is not the Besorgte but the
Gesorgte—i.e., it is not some “object” of the concern, but rather, the one
concerned. Human existence’s expecting comes from its making-pres-
ent: its ordering-up, making-available, taking-possession-of, holding-
on-to. And in its expecting, human existence qua ability is itself that to
which human existence primarily relates, albeit implicitly. In expect-
ing, human existence is always already in the mode of being unto its
ownmost ability. As being unto this ability [413] of its own self, human
existence is “ahead of itself.” And the condition of the possibility of this
being-ahead-of-itself (care),!°°i.e., the fundamental structure of this
very mode of being, is expecting. Care is possible as what it is only inso-
far as its being is time itself, as an expecting-qua-making-present. But
making-present is the ur-temporal meaning of familiarity with the
world. Ahead-of-oneself in familiarity-with [bei]—that is expecting-
qua-making-present, a determinate temporality of the time that consti-
tutes the being of human existence.”

Since human existence’s ability is never something that could be
“just there” like a thing; and since, therefore, it is not a merely-present
thing that can arrive: the word “future” is an inappropriate expression
for the original “futurity” of human existence. The command, “Be-
come what you are!”—understood ontically—is possible only if, taken
ontologically, J am what I am becoming, i.e., only if the very being of
my ability—namely, my being-ahead-of-myself—has the structure of
expecting.

Expecting is not only expecting a making-present, and it is not only
for such a making-present. Instead, it is fora making-present as retaining
something in the sense of a care for retaining, a not-letting-slip-away.
Concern that is factically referred to the world, like losing oneself in the

155. [Moser (p. 817.8-9) records “die vorhandene besorgte Umwelt,” whereas
GA 21 (p. 412.22) has “die zuhandene besorgte Umwelt.” I follow the latter, and
render zuhandene as “practical.” ]

156. [Moser (p. 817.28) has der Sorge.]

157. [The subordinate clause could modify either Zeitlichkeit or Zeit. |
342 Part II

world of one’s concerns, is a constant inability-to-hold-on-to as well as
a having-to-let-go-of the worldly things of one’s concerns as things that
essentially change. In turn, holding-on-to has various modes, such as
being deprived of; being unable to hold on to; letting slip away; no lon-
ger being concerned with something useful; forgetting; renouncing.
These are modes of human existence’s being—modes of its being unto
its ownmost having-been. And to that having-been there also belong
the objects of one’s concern, insofar as human existence first and fore-
most understands itself in terms of them, even as things that have got-
ten away from it. In these modes of time that belong to making-present
and expecting, qua retaining, as likewise with the future, we lack a cor-
responding term. “The past,” [414] on the contrary, means a now that
is no longer there, the already [gone], the no-longer-present-ness of
something that could be there.

The term “ahead” indicates expecting; “familiarity-with” indicates
making-present and holding-on-to. But what about the “already” [das
Schon]? That is an ur-temporal determination that pertains to all of
human existence’s time and its ontological facticity. The “already” is
the indication of the a priori of facticity. That means: The structures of
human existence—temporality itself—are not at all like an ever-avail-
able framework for something that can be merely-present. Rather, in
keeping with their most proper sense, these structures are possibilities
for human existence to be, and only that.

And every human existence gua human has already personally de-
cided, one way or the other, regarding this ability: either authenti-
cally, i.e., from out of oneself; or [inauthentically], by renouncing this
possibility; or by just not yet being up to such a decision. Human exis-
tence is handed over to itself in its having-to-be [Zu-sein]. “Handed
over”—that means: already in, already ahead-of-itself, already familiar
with the world, never something just-there but always already a pos-
sibility that has been decided one way or the other. Such human exis-
tence is always already prior to what it de facto is at any given moment.
But prior to every possible “prior” is time itself, which makes it possi-
ble that human existence can be the very possibility of its self.

To make a statement—to talk about something as something and
thereby to let it be seen as something—that is a determinate possibility
of pure making-present. It is letting an entity be present, and therefore
is the uncovering of the presence of something that is there. That is the
basic function of Adyoc as amtodaiveoSat. The presence of something
present, a presence that is discoverable only in a presenting, means
nothing but the being of entities. Every statement that uncovers—i.e.,
makes-present—thereby says “is.” It makes no difference whether this
“is” is expressed verbally or not, or how it is expressed. The “is” does not
have the function of a copula, but is the index of the basic function of a
§37. Time as an existential of human existence 343
statement—namely, its making-present as a pure making-present, a
pure letting-be-seen of the presence of entities, or of entities in their
presence. The expressed statement, insofar as it is true, preserves in it-
self the [415] uncoveredness of the entity. Preserving uncoveredness
means the same as being able to make something present at any time.
Accordingly, uncoveredness is a preeminent form of possible presenting:
it is the presenting of the entity we are talking about in its being and in
its being-this-way-or-that.

The uncoveredness or truth that is had in a world-related statement
bespeaks “presenting.”'** And “being” bespeaks “presence.” That is, the
meaning of being is grasped from out of presenting. Only in such pre-
senting is presence possible. Being simply cannot be understood in any
other way. Then what is meant by “understanding”? It means: to deter-
mine something as something. An entity is understood or grasped in its
in-itself-ness when it is understood in its pure being-for-itself. In other
words, it is understood in and from human existence’s pure presenting
of its world.'*’ Presenting is absolutely not subjective or subjectivistic or
idealistic in the usual, epistemological meaning of those words. Rather,
it is simply being unto the world, wherein the world can show itself in
its in-itself-ness in terms of its various levels of approximation and
determination.

Statements, insofar as they are statements about what is present,
are grounded in making-present. Logic is the most imperfect of all
philosophical disciplines, and it can be moved forward only if it re-
flects on the basic structures of its thematic phenomena, on the pri-
mary ontological structures of the logical as a comportment of human
existence, and on the temporality of human existence itself. But the
unexpressed basis of traditional logic is a specific temporality which is
oriented primarily to making-present, which is expressed in an ex-
treme form in the formulation of the Greek concept of knowledge as
Oeweia, pure intuiting. All the truth of such a logic is the truth of in-
tuition, where intuition is understood as making-present.

But should more radical temporal possibilities be found in the tem-
porality of human existence, these would necessarily set an essential
limit to traditional logic and ontology. Whether philosophical research
can be intense enough and firm enough to make this limit a lived fact
is a question that concerns the very fate of philosophy.

158. [Moser (p. 821.7-10) records the word mégliche (possible) before a hyphen-
ated Gegen-wart: “But uncoveredness or truth means the same as human exis-
tence’s possible presenting [rendering-present] its world.” ]

159. [“. . . aus der puren Gegenwart des Daseins zu seiner Welt” (GA 21, p.
415.12-13).]
—
Editor’s Afterword
Martin Heidegger held his four-hour-per-week lecture course on logic
in the Winter Semester of 1925-26 in Marburg am Lahn. The original
plan (cf. §5) was changed as the course was worked out. In contrast to
traditional logic, Heidegger poses a philosophizing logic that inquires
into Adyos: a logic of truth.

In the prologue he investigates the situation of present-day logic,
using as an example the logic that comes closest to a philosophizing
logic, Husserl’s Logical Investigations. Heidegger explains Husserl’s strug-
gle against psychologism and sets forth the dimension in which that
struggle unfolds.

In part I, Heidegger goes back to Aristotle’s interpretation of truth.
At the center of that stands the interpretation of Metaphysics © 10,
which has presented interpreters with so many difficulties.

Part II develops the question of truth within the horizon of the
analysis of Dasein, at the center of which lies the theme of time. An
interpretation of the Critique of Pure Reason reveals the meaning that
the problematic of time had for Kant. Here we have the core of Hei-
degger’s later text, Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics, and here the
individual analyses are worked out in more detailed fashion than they
are in that later work.

The present edition is based on Heidegger’s original manuscript, on
Fritz Heidegger’s typed copy of that, and on Simon Moser’s shorthand
transcript of the lectures. Because in those days Heidegger frequently
departed from his original notes during the lectures, the comments
recorded in Moser’s transcript were able to be taken into account for
purposes of clarification. Throughout the semester Heidegger regu-
larly went over Moser’s transcript. We find marginal notes in the tran-
script, as well as page-references to the transcript in Heidegger’s origi-
nal manuscript.

Up to §12, the section titles come from Heidegger.

345
346 Editor’s Afterword
For collaboration on this text I must thank Dr. Hiini, Dr. Schultze, as
well as my wife [Marly Biemel]. She helped me check and proof a large
part of the text and also undertook one final review of the finished text.
Dr. Htini and Dr. Schultze, as well as she, also helped in reading the
page proofs.
Aachen, June 1975
Walter Biemel
a

Glossaries

German-English
Abbild image; image-as-copy
abbilden to depict; portray [see darstellen]
Abbildung image; image-as-copy
das Abgebildete what gets reproduced / copied
Abgeziilte something that is counted up
Abschreibung a copy
abziahlen to count up
Anblick; Aussehen visible aspect of; the looks of
angewiesen assigned
anschaubar intuitable
anschaulich intuitional
Anschauung intuition; act of intuition
anwesend present [adj.]; something present [n.]
Anwesenheit presence; being-present
Anzahl the number-of-an-amount
aufdecken uncover
Auffassung conception; notion
aufweisen to prove; [occasionally] to show as
aufzeigen to indicate (apophantically)
Aussage statement
Aussehen; Anblick visible aspect of; the looks of
Ausser einander outside-each- other
Bedeutung meaning; signification
begegnen encounter; meet
begegnenlassen let [something] encounter / meet [us]
begreifen to grasp; apprehend; understand
Begriff concept; notion

347
348 Glossaries

bereitliegen already be operative

Besorgen concern-about

besorgend concernful; concerned

bestimmen determine; specify; define

bestimmt determinate; specific

Bestimmung determination; definition

Bild image

darstellen portray, depict [see abbilden]

Darstellung portrayal; depiction

Dasein human existence; [occasionally just]
existence

eigenst ownmost; one’s very own; most
proper

Binwirkung influence; effect

entdecken uncover; un-cover

entscheidend crucial; decisive; [occasionally]
essential

erfassen,; ergreifen grasp; apprehend; comprehend

erzeugen to produce

Erzeugung production

es gehen um to be concerned about

etwa wie [often not translated]

fassen grasp; apprehend; comprehend

fundamental basic; fundamental

Fiirsorge concern-for

Gegenwart presenting; [occasionally] making-
present [see Prdsenz]; the present
moment; the now-present; now-
presence—all according to the
context

gegenwartigen to render present; make present

gewartigen to expect

Gewartigen (the act of) expecting

Gewesenheit alreadiness; having-been

greifen to grasp; apprehend; comprehend

Handlung action; act; operation

heben to bring into relief; to highlight

Hebung the highlighting of

Hinblick pre-view of

das Worauf des Hinblicks what is pre-viewed of/in a pre-view

Hinblicknahme taking or having a pre-view of
Glossaries 349

immer schon always already (in the sense of a
priori)

Je currently; in each case; at each mo-
ment; [occasionally] always

Jetzt-Dieses now-this; now this

Jetztfolge now-sequence; sequence of nows

Man one; people

mannigfaltig multiple; manifold [adj.]

Mannigfaltige multitude; manifold [n.]

Manninagfaltigkeit multiplicity; manifoldness

Mensch human beings; [occasionally] human
being; people

Nacheinander one-after-another

Prasenz the making / rendering present of
something [see Gegenwart]

sachhaltig regarding content

sachlich relevant; pertinent; substantive;
issue-oriented; objective

sachmassig issue-oriented

Scheidung separation

Schemabild schema-image

Seiendes a being; beings; entity [or when the
word has no specific ontological
connotation] things

Sein being

Sein-bei familiarity with; being at home
with / in; being-with

Seinkonnen ability-to; ability; know-how

Sein zur Welt being unto the world

selbstverstandlich obvious; self-explanatory; goes with-
out saying

Sinn geben to make sense of

Solong [n.] a “while”

Sorge care

Soviel [n.] amount; so-much

temporal ur-temporal

Temporalitat ur-temporality

Umwelt lived world; life-world

ndchste Umwelt firsthand lived world

Unterschied difference; distinction; separation
350 Glossaries

urspriinglich original; basic; fundamental; originary

verbinden to combine

verdecken to cover-over

Verhaltung comportment

Versinnlichung sensibilization

vorgdngig prior; antecedent

vorhanden present; present-out-there; just-
there; merely there; on hand

Vorhandenheit thereness; out-there-ness; presence

vorstellen to present something

Vorstellung [mostly] presentation; [occasionally]
representation

Wiedergabe a copy

Wirklichkeit reality; [sometimes] actuality

Worauf des Hinblicks what is pre-viewed in a pre-view

Zahl number

zaihlen to count; to number; to number-an-
amount

Zahlen numbering; numbering-of-an-amount

zukommen come toward [us]

zukommend arriving; coming toward us

Zukunft future

zukiinftig futural

zundchst und zumeist first and foremost

Zusammenhang connection; context; [occasionally]
matrix; network

English-German

ability-to; ability Seinkénnen

act Handlung

action Handlung

actual wirklich

alreadiness Gewesenheit

already be operative bereitliegen

always immer, [occasionally] je

always already immer schon (in the sense of a priori)

amount [n.] Soviel

antecedent vorgdngig

apprehend greifen; begreifen; fassen; erfassen

a priori immer schon; a priori

arrive zukommen
Glossaries 351
assigned angewiesen
(visible) aspect of Aussehen; Anblick
basic fundamental; [occasionally]

urspriinglich
be concerned about es gehen um
being Sein
a / the being das Seiende
being at home with Sein bei
being familiar with Sein bei
beings das Seiende
being unto the world Sein zur Welt
bring into relief heben
care Sorge
care about [v.] besorgen
care about [n.] Besorgen
combine verbinden
come toward [us] zukommen
comportment Verhaltung
comprehend erfassen; fassen; begreifen; greifen
concept Begriff
conception Auffassung
concern about something Besorgen
concerned; concernful besorgend
concern for someone Fiirsorge
connection Zusammenhang
context Zusammenhang
copy [n.] Wiedergabe; Abschreibung
copy-as-image Bild
count up abzihlen
cover-over verdecken
crucial entscheidend
current; currently je
decisive entscheidend
define bestimmen
definition Bestimmung
depict darstellen
depiction Darstellung
determinate bestimmt
determination Bestimmung
determine bestimmen
determined bestimmt
difference Unterschied
352 Glossaries
effect [n.] Einwirkung [see “influence (n.)”]
effect [v.] einwirken
encounter begegnen
enumerate zahlen
equally original gleichursptinglich
existence Dasein
expecting Gewéartigen
familiarity with Sein bei
first and foremost zundchst und zumeist
firsthand lived world ndchste Umwelt
fundamental fundamental; ursptinglich
futural zukiinftig
future Zukunft
goes without saying selbstverstandlich
grasp griefen; fassen; begreifen; erfassen
having a pre-view of Hinblicknahme
highlight [v.] heben
highlighting [n.] Hebung
human beings Mensch
human existence Dasein
image Bild; Abgebildetes
image-as-copy Abbild; Abbildung
indicate (apophantically) aufzeigen
in each case je
influence [n.] Einwirkung [see “effect (n.)”]
intuitable anschaubar; [occasionally] anschaulich
intuition Anschauung
intuitional anschaulich
issue-oriented sachlich; sachmdssig
just there vorhanden
know-how Seinkonnen
let [something] encounter begegnenlassen

/ meet [us]
lived world Umwelt
looks of Aussehen; Anblick
make sense of Sinn geben
manifold [adj.] mannigfaltig
manifold [n.] das Manniagfaltige
manifoldness Manninagfaltigkeit
matrix Zusammenhang
Glossaries 353
meaning Bedeutung
meet begegnen
most proper eigenst
multiple mannigfaltig
multipleness Manningfaltigkeit
multiplicity das Mannigfaltige
next-to-each-other Nebeneinander
notion Begriff; Auffassung
now Gegenwart
now-presence Gegenwart
now-sequence Jetztfolge
now-this; now this Jetzt-Dieses
number [n.] Zahl
number [v. ] zahlen
number-of-an-amount Anzahl
objective [occasionally] sachlich
obvious selbstverstandlich
one Man
one-after-another Nacheinander
one’s very own eigenst
operation Handlung
original urspriinglich
originary urspriinglich
outside-each-other Ausser einander
out-there vorhanden
out-there-ness Vorhandenheit
ownmost eigenst
people Man; Mensch
pertinent sachlich
portray darstellen
portrayal Darstellung
presence Vorhandenheit
presence; being-present Anwesenheit
presence-now Gegenwart
present vorhanden; anwesend—according to

the context

presentation Vorstellung
the presenting of something Gegenwart; Prasenz
the present now Gegenwart
to present something gegenwéartigen; vorstellen
present there vorhanden
pre-view of Hinblick
the pre-viewed of a pre-view = Worauf des Hinblicks
354 Glossaries

primordial ursptinglich

prior vorgdngig

to produce erzeugen

production Erzeugung

prove aufweisen

reality Wirklichkeit

regarding content sachhaltig

relevant sachlich

to render present gegenwartigen

representation Vorstellung

schema-image Schemabild

self-explanatory selbstverstandlich

sensibilization Versinnlichung

separation Scheidung

sequence of nows Jetztfolge

show as aufweisen

signification Bedeutung

so-much [n.] Soviel

specific bestimmt

specify spezifizieren; bestimmen

statement Aussage

taking a pre-view of Hinblicknahme

temporality Zeitlichkeit

thereness Vorhandenheit

thing Ding; [or when the word has no
specific ontological connotation]
Seiendes

uncover aufdecken; entdecken

understand verstehen; begreifen; erfassen; greifen;
fassen

ur-temporal temporal

ur-temporality Temporalitat

visible aspect of Aussehen; Anblick

what gets reproduced / copied das Abgebildete

what is present das Vorhandene; Anwesende—accord-
ing to the context

what is there Vorhanden

a “while” [n.] Solong
Abbreviations

Akademie- Immanuel Kant, Kants gesammelte Schriften, 29 vols.

Ausgabe (PretiBische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1902-1911;
repr. 1968, Berlin and Leipzig: Walter de Gruyter)

CPR Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, tr. and ed. Paul
Guyer and Alan W. Wood (Cambridge and New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1998)

CW John Stuart Mill, Collected Writings, 33 vols., ed. John M.
Robson (Toronto: University of Toronto Press / London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1981-1991)

EDI Henri Bergson, Essai sur les données immédiates de la
conscience (Paris: Félix Alcan, 1889)

Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of Con-
sciousness, trans. F. L. Pogson (London: George Allen &
Unwin, 1910; repr. New York: Humanities, 1950)

GA Martin Heidegger, Gesamtausgabe, 102 vols., ed. Friedrich-
Wilhelm von Herrmann (Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio
Klostermann, 1975-)

GM Immanuel Kant, Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten, ed.
Paul Menzer (Akademie-Ausgabe, vol. 4)

Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals, ed. and trans. Mary
Gregor (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997)

HCT Martin Heidegger, History of the Concept of Time: Prolegom-
ena, trans. Theodore Kisiel (Bloomington: Indiana Uni-
versity Press, 1985)

Ideen Edmund Husserl, [deen zu einer reinen Phanomenologie und
phdanomenologischen Philosophie, I. Buch: Allgemeine Einftih-
rung in die reine Phanomenologie (Halle: Max Niemeyer,
1913)

Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenome-
nological Philosophy. First Book: General Introduction to a Pure
Phenomenology, trans. Fred Kersten (The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff, 1982)

355
356 Abbreviations

LU Edmund Husserl, Logische Untersuchungen. Erster Theil:
Prolegomena zur reinen Logik and Zweiter Theil: Untersu-
chungen zur Phanomenologie und Theorie der Erkenntnis
(Halle: Max Niemeyer, 1900-1901)
Logical Investigations, 2 vols., trans. J. N. Findlay (London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul / New York: Humanities Press,
1970)

SE Sextus Empiricus, 4 vols., trans. R. G. Bury (London: Wil-
liam Heinemann / Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1933-1949)

SZ Martin Heidegger, Sein und Zeit (1927) (GA 2), ed.
Friedrich-Wilhelm von Herrmann (Frankfurt am Main:
Vittorio Klostermann, 1977)
Being and Time, trans. John Macquarrie and Edward Rob-
inson (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1962)
