
TRANSLATORs' NoTE
Translating Heidegger always presents difficulties. We
have attemp1ted to be as accurate as possible, while holding
the invention of cumbersome terms to a minimum.
Dasein has been retained wherever possible. This key
word, translated literally as "Being-there," is Heidegger's
unique termt for man's own way of Being over against
other entities in the world. In a few instances, however,
it seemed best to translate it as ''existence," according to
the acceptedl mode. In these cases the German word is
retained in parentheses.
We take this opportunity to ·acknowledge the valuable
assistance of Waltraut J. Stein in translating some knotty
sentences, M:arsha Lynn Ballew, who helped with proofing
and the indices, and Elizabeth Barton, who worked
indefatigably in typing the manuscript.
W. B. Barton, Jr.
Vera Deutsch (Emeritus)
Memphis Sta!le University
v
PREFACE
This worlc presents the text of a lecture which was held
in the wintter semester, 1935-36, at the University of Freiburg.
The lecture was entitled "Basic Questions of Metaphysics."
Freiburg
April, 196~Z
vii
Martin Heidegger
WHAT IS A THING?
A. VARIOUS WAYS OF QUESTIONING ABoUT THE THING1
1. Ph;ilosophical and Scientific Questioning
From the range of the basic questions of metaphysics
we shall herte ask this one question: What is a thing? The
question is cJuite ~ld. What remains ever new about it is
merely thiit .at must be asked again and w· We coutcl[ lDlDle&iaiely Segm a len y discussion
about the question "What is a thing?" before we have
really posed it. In one respect this would even be justified,
since philos()phy always starts from an unfavorable position.
This is not so with the sciences (Wissenschaften),
for there is always a direct transition and entrance to
them starting out from everyday representations, beliefs,
and thinking. If one takes the everyday representation as
the sole standard of all things, then philosophy is always
• 1 The following footnote appears on the first page of the authorIZed
Gennan text from which this translation is made: "A transcript
of this lecture was reproduced without the knowledge
of the author and was put on the market outside Germany without
mentioning the! source ... Trans.
1
2 WHAT IS A THING?
Various Ways of Questioning Abour the Thing 3
~
"U""''P ~e:al 9aA~v 'GUTpat10p.oiivr11 ••• •«i AI'JU PAlwovr11, ~I"''CC el~
1/Jpl.ap, B,.HJrrtl Tw lp.pd?~ ~~~:cJ 'Xa.plrmn~. lcplln&t'lc 4~ Aiyf.Ttu. .W
tU plr lJv o6p4Df 7rpGfJup.oi.TO t&lll'a&1 ft. rep.rrrpoalo f.IWoV Col ~
,..aSa.~ ,u.~..s.tvo, uwdv. ,.The story is that Thales, while occupied
in studying the heavens above and looking up, fell
into a well. A good-looking and whimsical maid £rom
Tbrace laughed at him and told him that while he might
passion•~tely want to know all things in the universe, the
things iin front of his very nose and feet were unseen by
hitn." P•Iato added to this story the remark: TdTo• ~ clp~~:ri
crtCGJp.p.a iwl..hre~~ &rc,, 'rr .,r.Aouo•ly. Wyow&. "This jest also fits
all those who become· involved in philosophy .... Therefore,
the question '4What is a thing?" must always be rated as
one winch causes housemaids to laugh. And genuine
housemtaids must have something to laugh about.
Through. the attempt to determine the question of the
thing Vlfe have unintentionally arrived at a suggestion
about the characteristic Qf philosophy which poses that
question. Philosophy, then, is that thinking with which
one can start nothing and about which housemaids necessarily
laugh. Such a definition of philoso,lJhY is not a mere
joke bu!t is something to think over. We shall do well to
remember occasionally that by our strolling we can fall
into a urell whereby we may not reach ground for quite
some· time.
There· remains the question as to why we talk about
the funtdamental questions of metaphysics. The term
''metap.hysics" here should indicate only that the questions
dc:alt with stand at the core and center of philosophy.
Htowever. by "metaphysics" we do not mean a special
field or ~anch within philosophy in contrast to logic
and ctbics. There e no fie in · oso h because
philoso1phy itself is not a field. Somet · e a IVlsion
of labOr ts sense ess in '2hilosos,by; scholastic earntll§ is
to ~rt ·n extent indis ensa le to it bUt IS never its
;ssenc~~ e there ore want to keep s
4 WHAT IS A THING?
free from all that historically adheres to it. For us it signi·
fies only that procedure during which one runs the danger
of falling into. a well. Now, after this general preparation,
we can more closely delineate the question "What is a
thing?"
2. Ambiguous Talk About the Thing
First, what are we thinking about when we say ••a
thing"? We mean a piece of wood, a rock, a knife, a watch,
a ball, a javelin, perhaps a screw or a piece of wire. But
also a huge building, or a depot, or • giant spruce are referred
to as "huge things." In the summertime we speak
of many things in the meadow: grasses, herbs, the butter ..
Oies and the bugs. The thing there on the wall-the painting-
we also call it a thing, and the sculptor bas o;w1y
different finished and unfinished things in his workshop.
By contrast~ we hesitate to call the number five a thing,
because one cannot reach for the number~ne cannot
hear it or see it. Ift the same way a sentence "The weather
is bad,. is not a thing any more than is a single WQrd
"house." We distinguish precisely the thing "house., and
the word which names this thing. Also, an attitude or dis ..
position which we maintain or lose on some occasion is
not considered as a thing.
If, however, a betrayal is in the air we say, "There are
uncanny things going on." Here we do not refer to pieces
of wood, utensils, or similar items. When, in making a
decision, it depends ••above all things" on this or that consideration,
the other things which have been omitted are
not rocks or similar items but other considerations and
decisions. Also, when we say "things aren't right," "thingu
is used in a much broader sense than at the start of our
inventory. Now it has the sense which our German word
had from the very beginning, namely a court trial or an
Various Ways of Questioning About the Thing 5
affair}1 Similarly, we "clear things up somewhere," or as
the proverb states, "Good things take time.'" Also that
9/hich is not wood or stone, but every task and enterprise
needs time. And someone for whom "things are going
well" is a man whose affairs, wishes, and works are in
Jiood €ltrder.
"l It ntow becomes clear that we understand the term
·~ing" in both a narrower and a broader sense. The
narro~ver or limited meaning of ';thing" is that which can
be tow~ed. reached, or seen, i.e.; what is present-at-hand
(kfas Vorhandene ). In the wider meaning of the term, the
"thmg•·• is every· affair or transaction, something that is in
this or that condition, the things that happen in the world
-occurrences, events. Finally, there is still another use of
this word in the widest possible sense; this use was introduced,
Nitbin the philosophy of the eighteenth century and
was long in preparation. With respect to this, Kant speaks
of the "thing .. in-itself" (Ding an· sich) in order to distinpish
it from the -'thing-for-us" (Ding fur uns ), that is, as
i ''pheJ:tomenon."' A thing-in-itself is that which is not approachable
through experience as a~ the rocks, plants,
and animals. Evecy thing-for-us is as a thing and ·also a
drlng·bt·itself, which means that it is recognized ·absolutely
·within the absolute knowledge of God. But not
every thing-in-itself is also a thing-for·us:· God, for instance,
is a thing-in-itself, as Kant uses the word, according
to the meaning of Christian theology. Whenever Kant
calls Gc:xi a thing, he does not mean a giant gas like formation
that acts somewhere in bidden depths. According to
strict usage, "thing" here means only "something''
(etwas), that which is not nothing. We can think some-
2 Das Ding: From Germanic legal language, originally designating
the tribunal4 or assembly of free men. The thingcoall) was a
ca~se one negotiated or reconciled in the assembly of judges. I
He&degge~ in a later work refers to this in setting forth the notion 1
~r thing as what assembles a world. See the lecture on Das Ding
m Martin Heidegger, VQrtriige und Aufslitze (VA) (Pfullingen:
Verlag ~!eske, 1954), pp. 172·74. Trans.
6 WHAT IS A THING?
thing by the tenn and concept of "God,'' but we cannot
experience· God as we do this piece of chalk, about which
we can make and prove such statements as: If we drop
this piece of chalk it will fall with a certain velocity.
God is a thing insofar as He iS something at all, an X.
Similarly, number is a thing, faith and faithfulness are
things. In like manner the signs > < are "something,"
and similarly ''and" and "either/or.''
If we again ask our question "What is a thing?" we
realize that this question is- not in good order, because
what should be put into question, that is, the "thing," is
ambiguous in its meaning. What is to be put into question
must be sufficiently defined to become questionable in the
right way. "Where is the clQg?" "The dog" cannot be
searched for if I do not knowwhether it is our own dog or
the neighbor's. ''What is a thing?" Thing in what sensein
the limited, the wider, or the widest? We have to distinguish
three different meanings even if the means of distinction
is still uncertain:
1. A thing in the sense of being present-at-hand: a rock,
a piece of wood, a pair o£ pliers, a watch,. an apple. and a
piece of bread. All inanimate and all ~ma,te ·things such
as a rose, shrub, beech tree, spruceJ lizard, and wasp· ....
2 .. Thing in the sense in which it means whatever is
named but which includes also plans. decisions, reflections,
loyalties, actions, historical things ....
'I. 3. All these and anything else that is a something (ein
"'Etwas) and not nothing.
Within what boundaries we determine the meanings of
the term "thing" always remains arbitrary. With respect
to this the scope and direction of our questions will
change.
It is closer to our linguistic usage of today to under·
stand the term "thing'' in the first (narrower) signification.
Then each of these things (rock, rose, apple, watch)
is also something (etwas), but not every something (the
number five, fortune, bravery) is a thing.
4l
Vario·us Ways of Questioning About the Thing 7
In askiOJ!J "What is a thing?" ·we shall adhere to the
first meaning; not only because we want to stay close to
the usage of language but also because the question concerning
the thing. even where it is understood in its wider
and widest meanings. mostly aims at this narrower .field
and begins from it. As we ask "What is a thing?" we now
mean the tbtings around us. We take in view what is most
immediate. most capable of being grasped by the hand.
By obscrvin:g such, we reveal that we have learned something
from 1the laughter of the housemaid. She thinks we
should first look aJVund thoroughly in this round&aboutus
(Um-un~·herunJ). ¥ •
3. The DrYference in Kind Between tlte Question
of Thingness (Dingbeit) and Scientific
and Technical Methods
As soon as we begin to define these things, however, we
run into an embarrassment. All these tbinp lia\'C really
beep settled long ago. and. if not, tbere are proven scien·
tific ~ocedurcs and methods of ~rod~tion in wh!ch they
can settlea. wliat a stone is ciiiJied and mmt qnickly be told by n11ineralogy and chemistry: what a rose or a hvm js1 botany teaches ielii6Jy; whit a frog or a falcon isJ
zoology; as to what a shoe is, or a horseshoe, or a watch.
th(j)ioemuer, the §lacksmiffi, and the watchmaker, respectively,
give the best technical informatio.n. ..
It turns out that we are always too $low with our question,
and we are immediately referred to quarters which
already have a far better answer ready or, at least, experiences
and methods to give such answers quickly. This
only confirms what we have already admitted, namely,
~hat we cannot start to do anything with the question
.. What is a thing?" But since we intend ( vorhaben) to
clarify this question, especially with regard to immediate
things, it will be necessary to make clear what else we
Want to knov11 in contradistinction to the sciences.
a
8 WHAT IS A THING?
With our question "What is a thing?" it obviously is
not our purpose to discover what granite, a pebble, limestone,
or sandstone is but rather what the rock is as a
thing. We do not.care to know how to distinguish at any
time mosses, ferns, grasses, shrubs, and trees, but what
.. the plant is as a thing, and similarly in respect to animals.
We do not care to know what pliers are in comparison
with a hammer, what a watch is in comparison with a
key; but we want to know what these implements and
tools are as things. What this means, of course, must be
further clarified. But if one once admits that we can ask
the question in this way,. ·then obviously one demand re.
mains: namely, that we stick to dte facts and their exact
observations in order to discover what things are. What
things are cannot be contrived at a desk or prescribed by
generalized talk. It can be determined only in workshops
and in the research laboratories. And if we do not confine
ourselves to this then we will be exposed to the laughter
of housemaids. We are inquiring about things,.and yet we
pass over (uberspringen) all the giV'ens and the opportu·
nities which, according to general opinion. give us adequate
information about all these things.
This is how it actually looks. With our question "What
is a thing?" we not only pass over the particular rocks
and stones, particular plants and their species, animals
and their species, implements and tools, we also pass over
whole realms of the inanimate, the animate, and tools.
and desire to know only .. What is a thing?,.. In inquiring
this way. we seek wbat makes the nnng a ''''"I an~tl!ot
what rfiakes it a _stone or wood;_ wha_t conditions
(be-dingt)!' the thinJJ~e do not ask ~ncerni~g a thing of
l some species but after the thin&JWss .ou thi!]l. ~
11 arious Ways of Questioning About the Thing 9
condition of being a thin • which conditions· · as
a .tJiii!ir, cannot 1tse ··again .e a t in , i.e. somethin condi(
JQW:s. • e thingness mus e somethinf. un-condi ...
tioned (un·beding{es). With tire question 1 What is a
th~ are asking}! soms:;n;co:ntee:.:e ask 'i59Ut wfiat IS all arJindjiS ___ e -~-dy .:_e
Juilj alienate ourselves from e · ediate
tbill&s very much more t an T les, who could §Se
oiJUs far as the stars. But we· want to pass beyond even
these thiilgs to the unconditioned, where there are no
mcue things that provide a basis and ground.
kbd, nevertheless, we pose this question on)y in order
to Jmo,w what a rock is, and a lizard taking a sunbath on
it, a blade of grass that grows. beside it, and a knife which
perhaps we hold in our hands while we lie in the meadow.
We waLDt to know just that, something that the mineralogist,
botaiust,. ~oologist,. and metallurgist perhaps don't
waJ]t to know·at all. something that they only think they
... t to know while actually wanting something else: to
pro\nc•te the progress of science, or to satisfy the joy of.
discovery, or to show the technical usage of things, or to
make a livelihood. We, however, desire to know what
tlaese tneil not only do not want to know but perhaps what
tJtw n•ever can know in spite of their science and technical
sldU. This sounds .presumptuous. It doesn't only sound
so, it i's. Naturally this is not the presumptuousness of a
single person any more than our doubt about the desire
and ability of the sciences to know passes sentence on the
attitude and conviction of particular persons or even
against the utility and the necessity of science.
The demand for knowledge in our question is a pre-1
sumption of th~ kind found in every essential decision
(Eutscheidung ). Although we are alr~ady familiar with
this cLecision, that does not mean that we have already
passed through it. It is the decision whether we want to
~f these= words must not be overlooked. An ••assembly" does condition
smnething. Trans. ·
10 W HAT I ·s A T HI N G ?
know· those things with whiCh· Qne can start to do nothing
-in the sense of this figure of speech. If we forego this
knowledge and don't ask this question, then all remains
as it is. We shall pass our examinations, perhaps even better,
without asking this question. Even if we ask this
question, we shall not overnight become better botanists.
zoologists, historians, jurists, or physicians. But perhaps
better or more cautiously put-certainly different
teachers, different physicians and judges, although even
then we can start to do nothing with this question in o1,1r
professions. '*
With our question, we want neither to replace the ,sD;.
e.nces nor to reform ( verbessem) them. On the other
hand. w~ want to. artici . . . easionl
me i.'li!CJSlon: Is science t},e measure of knowledge,
or is t ere ak owled e in whiCh tb d .and limit of
science an thus · ectiveness are det · edP
Is t · s genuine knowledge necessary or a bistori people,
or is it dispensable or replaceable by somethinl
efse? .
However, decisions are not worked out by merely talking
about them but by creating situations and taking pos,ltions
in which the decision is unavoidable. in which 1l
becomes the most essential decision when one docs ndt
make it but rather avoids it.
The uniqueness of such decisions rentains that they are
prepared for only by questions with which one cannot
start to do anything insofar a:s common opinion and the
horizon of' housemaids are concerned. Furthermore, this
questioning always looks like. a pretense to know better
than the sciences. The term "better" always means a
difference of degree in one and the same realm. However,
with our question we stand outside the sciences, and the
knowledge for which our question strives is neither better
nor worse but totally different. Different from science
but also different from what one calls a "Weltanschauung."
Varb.,us Ways of Questioning About the Thing 11
4. The BvE~ryday and Scientific Experiences of the Thing,·
2~he Question Concerning Their Truth
The qu~stion "What is a thing?'' seems now to be in
order.It ls at least roughly determined: ( 1) What is puf S
in quOS.t;ioll, and (2) That whereafter we ask regarcliniwbat
1$- pu't in question. Put in question is the ''thing" in
its ~W4er meaning, which refers us to the present-at·
han4 ~(Vor·lulnden ). That whereafter the thing is asked ana. iiltemogated, as it were, is thingness, what deterblln.
es,a thiq as such to be a thing.
YetWbe.J~ we start to ascertain this thingness of a thing
we ~tely helpless in spite of our well-ordered
que _ _:-.. ·,Where should we grasp the thing? And besides: -
we u.+re find "the thing," but only particular things,,<-i
these:-- tlhose things. What makes this so? Is it only we,
~ fir·st and foremost, we strike only the particular
~·!h• 01lly afterward, as it seems, extract and pull off
~(.'bWct) the general, in this case the tbingness, froD1 the
~ar? Or is· the fact that we always meet only, par•
d~gs inherent in. the things themselves? And if it
is ia-- tlainp, is it then only their somehow basic or
accicleJital c:aprice to meet us in this way, or -do they meet
us as jJarti~~rs because they are within themselves particular,
as 1:he things which they are?
In any a&se, this is where our everyday experience and
opinion a~>Ut things is directed. But before we continue
this line of our -questioning, it is necessary to insert an
intervening examination of our everyday ·experience.
There is D()t at first, nor later on, any valid reason to
doubt our e~veryday experiences. Of course, it is not sufficient
simply to claim that that which everyday experience
shows of the things is true, any more than it is
sufficient tc, maintain in a seemingly more critical and
cautious way: after all, as individual humans we are individual
sulbjects and egos, and what we represent and
12 WHAT IS A THING?
Various Ways of Questioning A-bout the Thing 13
be characte·rized as diminutive. And the sun. which daily
rises and se:ts and dispenses light, is ever growing colder;
our earth, in order to maintain the same degree of
warmth, W4:>uld have to come always closer to the sun.
However, it is moving away from the sun. This means it
rushes toward • catastrophe, albeit in ,.time spans" in
comparison1 with which the few thousand years of human
history on t!arth amount to not even one second.
Now whi~ch of these is the true sun? Which thing is the J
true one. the sun of the shepherd or the sun of the astrophysicist?
Or is the qu~tion wrongly put, and if so .. why?
How should this be decided? For that. obviously, it is
necessary tc> know what a thing is, what it means ta.be~athing,
and how the truth of a thing is determined. On
these questions neither the shepherd nor the astrophysicist
informu us. Neither can or needs to pose these questions
in ord.er to be immediately who they are.
Another •example: The BrfUsh physicist and astronomer
Eddintrton once satd o his ta61e1hat every thiiW of
tlits lind 1the table, ihe cnatf, etc. has a dot16le. Table
numbsr onee is the table Rnowii smce hiS childhoOd; table
nu~er twc;"ls the "sc1enii1ic tltJie,_' this scientific table,
that is, the table which sClence defines in its thingness,
consists, acc:ording to the atomic physics of today, not of
wood but Jtlostly of empty space;. in this emptiness electrical
charges are distributed here and there, which are
rushing back and forth -at great velocity. Which one now
is the true table, number one or number two? Or are both
true? In the sense of what truth?What truth mediates between
the h.vo? There must be still a third one according
to which number one and number two are true in their
way and reJpresent a variation of this truth. We cannot
save oursel\'es by the favored road of saying: whatever is
asserted about the scientific table number two, the spiral
nebula. and the dying sun are but viewpoints and theories
of physics. To that the retort is: on this physics are
founded all our giant power stations, our airplanes, radio
14 WHAT IS a\ THING?
5. Particularity and Being-This-One ( Jediesheit).
Space and Time as D<!terminations of Things
• In exsryday experience we always meet part~
things. With this suggestion we resume the pursuit oF our
question after the above digression.
"Begrilndung: "A foundation," '•establishment,'' 11argument,''
"reasops for," 0 explanation," "proof." The English ••ground•• is
equivalent to Grund; but the German includes the idea of a foundation
of a building. Heidegger seems to emphasiZe this aspect
of its meaning. Therefore, in the related words this sense will be
adhered to where possible. Kant and tire Problem of Metaphysics,
James S. Churchill, trans. (Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1962). p. 3, n. 1. Trans.
Various Ways of Questioning About the Thing 15
The things; are particular .. That means first: the stone,-,.
the lizard, tbe blade of grass, and the knife are each-foritself
(je fii.r sich). Moreover. the stone is a completely
definite ·one, exactly this one; the lizard is not a lizard in
general, but just this one, and so it is with the blade of
grass and the knife, There is no thing in general, only particular
thing.s; and. the particulars, moreover, ate just
these (je di~•e). Bach thing is one such this one (ein je A
dieses) and n1o other.
Unexpectedly. we meet with .something which belongs
to the thing 1as a thing. This is a determination that is
disregarded by the sciences which, with their thrust toward
facts, alpparently come closest to things. For a
botanist, when he examines the labiate. flower, will never
be concerned about the single flower as a single one: it
always remains an exemplar only~ Tluit is also true of the
animal. s, for example, the countless frogs and sala-L
manders whic:h are killed in a laboratory. The "this one""
(je di.eses) which distinguishes every thing, is passed over
by science. Slnould we now consider the things in this
way? With the countlessness of things we would never
come to an .,nd, and we would continually establish
nothing but irrelevancies. However, we··are not directing
ourselves e~c.lusively at the particulars, always these
things (je die.se Dinge) one after another, but are after
every thing's ·~eneral characteristic of being 11this one":~
the being-this~one (Jediesheit ), if such a word formation
is acceptable. - If., 17•,J&r ro~ ,.._. ft.C l.rh"~
But is the sentence "f.very thing is a this one (ein je
di~ses) and no·t another one" at all applicable? There are
tha~gs which do not differ at all from one another, things
wh1ch are exactly alike, as two buckets or two pine
needles which we cannot distinguish from each other in
any respect. TJhe fact, one could say that we cannot distinguish
betwE:en the- two exactly aiike things does not
prove that. in the end. they are not different. However,
even assumins: that two single things are simply alike.
16 WHAT IS A TH lNG?
each is still this .thing because each of these two pin~
needles is in another place ( Ort ): and if they are to occupy
the same place, they can do so only at a different
time point. Place and time point make even absolutely
alike things be these very ones (je diesen), i.e., different
\f ones. I_nsofar as each thing has its place, its time, and its
1'- time duration, there are never two same things .. The particularity
(Jeweiligkeit) of the places and their manifoldness
are grounded in space, and the particularity of the
time points is grounded in time. That basic characteristic
of the thing, i.e., that essential determination of the thingness
of the thing to be this one ( ;e dieses), is grounded in
the essence of space and time.
Our question "What .is a thing?" includes, therefore, the
~ questions "What is space?" and "What is time?'' It is customary
fQr us to speak of them both together. But how
and why ate space and time conjoined? Are they conjoined
at all, as though externally thrust onto one another
and ·into one another; or are they primordially at one? Do
they stem from a common root,. from some third, or bet~
ter, some first which is neither space nor time because
more primordially it is both? These and other related
questions will occupy us,. i.e., we will not set our minds at
rest that there is space and time and that we place them
next to each other-space and time-by use of the patient
little word "and," as in "dog and cat.'' In order to keep
hold of these questions by means of a title, we call them I the question of the time-span (Zeitraum ). We understand
by time-span a certain length of time, and say: within the
time-span of a hundred years. By this expression we really
mean only something temporal. In contrast to this very
common usage, which is very instructive for further
thought, we will give the composite "Zeitraum" a
meaning that is designed to indicate the inner unity of
space and time. Thereby, the real question applies to the
"and." That we name time first, that we say Zeitraum and
not Raumz.eit, should indicate that time plays a special
Vclrious Ways of Questioning About tile Thing 17
role in this question. But that shoJJld ~ me.n at all .that
space c'1n be deduced fr9m time or that it is something
secondary to it.
The question "What is a thing?" includes in itself the :x
questiOJl: "What is Zeitraum (time-span)?", the puzzling
unity of space and time within which, as it seems, the
basic character of things, to be only this one, is deter·
mined.
We ~ill not escap~ the question about the essence of
space .a:nd time, because immediately so many doubts
arise re,garding the distinguishing mark we .gave of the
ihingnetss of the thing. We said: Place ~nd -time point
make even absolutely identical things just these (je
diesen ), i.e., different ones. But are space and time at all
detenni:nations of the thing itself.? The things, as we say,
are inde:ed within space and time. Space and time are a '
frame, ;m ordering realm, with the help of which we
establish and indicate the place and time point of the
particular things. It might be. therefore, that each thing,
if it is d•etermined with respect to place and time, is now
just this (je dieses.), not mistakable for any other. How·
ever, thc~se are only determinations which are externally
brought to and at a thing through the space-time relation.
As yet, nothing is said about the thing itself or what
makes it to be this one. We easily see that behind these
difficulties hides the principal question: Are space and X
tirne only a frame for the things, a system of co~ordinates ·
which ·we lay out in order to reach sufficiently exact statements
a~bout things, or are space and time something
else? Is the relation to them of the thing not this external
one? (Ccl:rnpare Descartes.)4
h~ Descarte.s identifies space or internal place with the body
w •ch Oc•:upacs it: "For. in truth, the same extension in length.
~readth •. an~ depth. which constitutes space, constitutes body.''
hhe distmchon we make is only a conceptual one; extension being
~ e co~mon .rac~or, individuali7.ed in the case of body. but given
~encnc una ty m the case or space. For this reason Descartes
l"eJccb tb~ notion of lhc vacuum. (Tfte Principles of Philosophy,
18 WHAT IS A THING?
According to the everyday manner we are used to, we
look at what is around us. We can notice: this cbalk is
white; this wood is hard; the door is closed. But such
statements do not carry us to the goaL We want to look
at. the things with respect to their thingness, therefore for
what presumably characterizes all things and each thing.
When we look at them with respect to this we Jind that
things are singular: one door, one piece of chalk, one
\.··· olackboard. etc. Being· singular is obviously a general, uni/'
versally applicable ·characteristic (Zug) of things. If we
look more closely, we even discover that these sinsle
things are just these (je die.se): this door. this chalk, this
now and here, not those of classroom six and not the ones
from last semester.
Thus. we already have an answer to our question
"What is a thing?" A_thing is always a this one ( fe dieses )..
We now seek to understand more precisely wherein this
essential characteristic of the· thing consists. The above
named characteristic of the things, that they are always
these (je. diese), stands in conjunction with space and
• J time. Through its particular space and time point, each
/"- thing is unmistakably this one and not another. However,
some doubts arise as to whether with such a reference to
space and time we are saying anything about the thing
itself. Such statements about the· place and time point
after all concern only the frame within which things stand
Part 11. Principles X-XVIt E. S. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross, trans.,
The Philosophical Works of Descartes [N.Y.: Dover Publications,
1955], 2 vols., l, 259-62.)
In Meditation Ill and in his reply toP. Gassendfs objections,
Descartes asserts the doctrine or continual creation. based on his
belief that the moments of time are discrete. Thus he asserts:
" •• ~ that the single moments of this time can be separated from
their neighbours, i.e.~ that a thing which endures through individual
moments may cease to exist.'' (Ibid., 11, 219; 1, 163, 164.)
Descartes, therefore, identifies both space and time with the
existent thing. Both are considered as external in their relation
to the thiDB only because of the way we conceptually give them
generic unity. Trans.
Various Ways of Questioning About the Thing 19
and how, that is to say where and when, they happen to
stand within it. One could point out that each thing-as
far as w1e know things-has its space-time-position
( Raum-ZeJlt-Stelle ), and that this relation of the thing to
space and time is not something arbitrary. Do things
necessaril~f stand within this space-time-relation (RaumZeit-
Bez.ug·J, and what is the basis for this necessity?
Does this lbasis lie in the things themselves? If this were
the case, then the aforementioned characteristic would
have to as:sert something about things themselves, about
the being-a-thing (Dingsein ).
First, however, we have the impressiQn that space and
time are· something outside of things .. Or does this i-mpression
deceive us? Let us look more closely: this piece
of chalk, tlne room-better, the space of the classroomlies.
around this thing, if we must speak of a "lying"
around. We say that this piece of chalk takes up a certain
space. This space is delimited by the surface of the piece
of chalk. Surface? Plane? The piece of chalk itself is extended.
The space is not only around it, but directly in it,
even within it; but this space is ~pied, &lied up. The
chalk itself consists inwardly of space .. After all, we say
the chalk ttakes up this space, enclQses this space by its
surface, in itself, as its interior. Therefore, for the chalk,
this space is not a mere exterior frame. But what does
interior m~ean here? What does the interior of the chalk
look lika? Let us see. We break it into two pieces. Are we
now at the: interior? Exactly as before we are again outside.
Na_thing has changed. The pieces of chalk are
(
smaller, bt.at b-igger or smalle.r. does not m__ att~r now. The
surfaces where it is broken are less smooth than the rest
of the sur.f:ace, but that does not matter. The moment we
j wa~ted lu open the chalk by breaking it, to grasp the in·
tc~o.r :, i! had-enclosed itsc. If again._And w. e could continue
• this actJon until the piece of chalk had become a little pile
of powderJ. Under a magnifying glass· and a microscope
(~We could s1till br~k up these tiny grains. Where this limit
l~ c.{e_.~ rO,.L J•Ar c~'t".tt Jt(._c{ J'c.
20 WHAT IS A THING?
of such a ''mechanical" division lies cannot be clearly determined.
In any·case. such breaking up· never yields anything
but what was already here, ftom which it started.
Whether this piece or chalk is four centimeters or .004
millimeters only makes a differenc-e in how muclt but not
in what (essence).
Following this mechanical division we could carry out
a chemical-molecular analysis .. We could even go behind
that. to the atomic structure of the molecules. But ac-cording
to the starting point of our question, we want to
remain in the realm of the things immediately around us.
But even if we go the way of chemistry and physics, we
never reach beyond the sphere of mechanics, that is, b&yond
such a spatial sphere wherein matter moves from
place to place or rests in one place. On the basis of the
results of our present atomic physics-since Niels Bohr
exhibited his model of the atom ( 1913 )-the relations between
matter and space are no longer so simple, although
fundamentally still the same. What keeps a place occupied,
takes up space, must itself be extended Qur question
been what the interior . ·cal bod looks
like· ore exact y, t e space "there." The result is: this
int · · r is a a ain an exterior · or . an~
smaJJer particles.
Meanwhile, our piece of chalk has become a little pil
of powder. Even if we assume that nothing of the matter
has escaped, that the full amount is still here, it is no
longer our chalk, i.e., we can no longer write with it on
the blackboard. We could accept that. But we cannot accept
that we could not find the space we looked for in the
interior of the chalk, the space which belongs to the chalk
itself. But, perhaps we did not reach for it fast .enough.
Let us break the piece of chalk again! The surface where
it is broken and the pieces of surface are now the exterior.
But this piece of surface which was just previously "interior"
is exactly that piece of surface delimiting the
grains of chalk, and it was always the exterior of these
Various Ways of Questioning About the Thing 21
pieces of chalk. Where does the interior begin and the ex- ...
terior end? Does the chalk consist of space? Or is the
space always :a container, something of an enclosure, of
which the chalk consists, of that which the chalk itself is?
The chalk only fills space; a place is always placed into
the thing. This; placing in of space tells us exactly that the
space remainsi outside. Whatever occupies space always -
forms the border between an outside and an inside. But
the interior is really only an exterior lying farther back.
(Strictly speaking, there is no· outside or inside within
space itself.) lBut where in the world would there be an
outside and btside, if not in space? Perhaps, however,
space is only t:he possibility of outside and inside but itself
neither aJn interior nor an exterior. The statement
11Space is the ·possibility of inside and outside'' might be
true. What w·e call ••possibility" (Miiglichkeit) is still
rather indefini.te. ••Possibility" can mean many things. We
are not of the opinion that we have decided with such a
statement the question of the relation between the thing
and space. Perhaps the question has n9t yet been sufficiently
posed. Up to now we have not considered that
space which especially ·concerns ·such things as this chalk,
as well as writing tools and implements in general. which
we call the storeroom (equipment room: Zeugraum ).
We were concerned to reflect on whether space and lc
time are "exte1r.lor'' to things or not. y'et it became.evident
th~t the spa~c! which appears most likely to be within
things is something exterior when viewed from the physical
thing and its particles.
Still more exterior to things is timc)trhe chalk here also
has its times: the time point (Zeitpt•nkte) now in which
the chalk is he·re, and this next now when it is there. With
the question c:oncerning space there still appeared some
P~spects of Hnding it within the thing itself. But even
thts as not the. case with time. Time runs over things as a
brook passes over rocks. Perhaps not even in this way,
because, in the movement of the waters. the rocks are
22 WHAT IS A THING?
pushed and driven so that they rub and polish each other.
The movement of time,. however, leaves things untouched.
That the time now advances from 5:15 to 6:00 does
nothing to the chalk. We do say 'fwith" time or "with the
passing'' of time things are changing. It is even said that
the iiJ .. famed "tooth'' of time is "nibbling" on things. That
things are changing in the passing of time is not to be denied.
But did anyone ever observe how time nibbles at
things, that is, generally speaking, how time goes to work
on things?
But perhaps time is identifiable only with some outstanding
things. We know such things: clocks; They show
the time. Let us look at this clock. Where is time? We see
the .figures and the hands which move, but not time. We
can open a clock and examine it. Where here is time? But
this clock does not give the time immediately. This clock
is set according to the German Observatory in Hamburg.
If we were to travel there and ask the people where they
have the time, we would be just as wise as before our
journey.
If, therefore, we cannot even find time on that thing
which shows time, then it actually .seems .to have nothing
to do with things themselves. On the other.band, it is after
all not merely empty talk when we say that we can tell
the time with the help of clocks. If we deny this, where
would that lead? Not only the schedule of everyday life
would fall to pieces, but every technical calculation would
also become impossible; history, every memory, and
every decision would be gone.
And yet, in what relation do things stand to time? With
every attempt to determine this, the impression is renewed
more strongly than before that space and time are
only perceptual realms for things, indifferent toward
these but useful in assigning every thing to its space-timeposition.
Where and how these perceptual realms really
are remains open. But this much is certain: only on account
of this position do particular things become just
Various Ways of Questioning About the Thing 23
these (je diesen ). And there is then, after aU, at least the ~
po•ssibility of many same things. Precisely when we look
at the question from things themselves and not from their
frnme of reference. each thing is not unmistakably a single~
one (je dieses); it is that only with respect to space
and time.
Now, it is true that one of the greatest German
thinkers, Leibniz, bas denied that there ever could be two
idc!ntical things. Leibniz established, with regard to this,
a :special principle ·which ruled throughout this philos•
op•hy, of which today we hardly have an idea. lt is the
prJncipium identitatis indiscemibilium. the principle of
th•~ identity of indiscernible things. The principle states:
Tvio indistinguishable things, i.e., two alike things, cannot
be two things but must be the same, i.e., one thing. Why,
we: ask? The reason Leibniz gives is just as essential for
th4: fundamental principle as for his entire basic pbilQsoJphical
system. Two alike things cannot be two, i.e., each
is irreplaceably this one (je dieses) because two alike
things cannot exist at all. Why not? The being of thinp is
thc!ir creation by God, as understood in the Christian
thf:ological interpretation. If there ever were two alike
things, then God had twice created the same, i.e., simply
repeating something eternal. Such a superficially mechanical
deed, however, contradicts the completeness of
tht: absolute Creator, the perfectio Dei. Therefore, there
can never be two alike things, by reason of the essence of
being, in the sense of being created. This principle is
based here upon certain more or less explicit principles
anc:l basic perceptions of what is in general and the being
o.f that; moreover, upon certain conceptions of the perfecta~
n of creation and production in general.
,We are not now sufficiently prepared to take our stand
with respect to the principle expressed by Leibniz and its
foundation. It is necessary always to see again to what
lengths the question "What is a thing?" immediately
lea.ds. It could be that this theological argument of the
24 WHAT IS A THING?
principle is impossible for us, even disregarding the question
of the dogmatic truth of Christianity. However, one·
thing remains certain; in fact, it now first comes to light
that tb. e question concerning the character of the being of
gs, to be singular and "this one," is completely and enly
hung up in the question concerning being. Does being
still mean to us being created by God? If not, what
then? Does beins no longer mean anything at all to us, so
that we are only staggering around in a confusion? Who
can decide how it stands with being ancf...its determination?
But we first ask only about the proximate things
around us. They show themselves as singular and as "just
these." From our reference to Leibniz, we concluded that
the character of the things, to be "just these," could be
based on the being of things themselves and not only with
reference to their position in space and time.
6. The Thing as Just This One (je dteses)
But we shall let alone the question from where the
character of a thing as .. just this one" is determined, and
pose a still more preliminary question, which is wrapped
in the preceding one.
We said that the single things around us are --just
these." When we say of something which encounters us
that it is this, are we saying anything about the thing itself
at all? This, namely. the one here, i.e., that which we now
point out. In "this" lies a pointing, a referring. We indi- _.
cate something to the others who are with us, with whom
we are together. It is a reference within the range of the
uhere"-this one here, this here. The ,.this" means, more
precisely, here in our immediate neighborhood; while we
always mean something more distant by "that," but still
within the range of "the here and there"-this here, that
there. The Latin language has in this connection still·
sharper distinctions. Hie means "this here," iste means
Varia~.- Ways of Questioning .About the Thing 25
''that there.'' llle means "that far away,"· the Greek actby
which the poets intend what is at the periphery-what
we call the ulterior (Jenseitige).
In grammall' such words as "this" ~nd "that" -.re called
demonstratives, for these words demonstrate, they point
at. , . ,. The ueneral verbal character of these reference
words comes1 to expression in the term demonstrative
pronoun (Fur-worter). The Greeks said d:n.,wp.lu, which
became the standard for Western grammar eAvrowup.lcu
&ucTuccal). In tbis designation of such words as "this" and
"that" lies a quite definite explanation and interpretation )\
of their essence. The interpretation is indeed significant
for Western 1:rammar (which, in spite of everything, still
governs us today). Yet it is misleading. The name "pronoun"
(Fur-wort ),considering a word as a noun (nomen),
a name (Nam~e) and substantive, means that such words
as "this" take the place of substantives. It is true that they
do this, yet it is only what they do also. We speak of the
chalk but do not always use the name, using instead the
expression "this." However, such a substituting role is
not the original essence of the pronoun; its naming fUnction
is more jprimordial. We grasp it immediately when
we remember that the article ''the" is derived from the
demonstrative' words. It is customary to place the article
before the substantive. T~e naming reference of the arti-'
cle always got=s beyond the noun. The naming of the substantive
itself always occurs on the basis of a pointingout.
This is l:l "demonstration," exhibiting the encountered
and the present-at·hand. The function· of naming. ~
which is. perfo!"llled in the dem~nst~ative. belongs !o the
most pnmorchal way of speaking m general. It ,1s not
merely a substitution, i.e., not a second··or later order of
expression.
To consider what has been said is Important for the
correct evaluation of the "this.'' It is somehow included in
every naming as such. Insofar as things confront us, they
come into the character of "this.'' But thereby we are say,
26· WHAT IS A THING?
ing thJt the "this'' is not characteristic of the thing itself.
The ~#this" takes the thing only insofar as it is an object of
a demonstration. Those speaking and thinking, however,
who use such demonstrative words, i.e., human beings,
are always single subjects. The 1'this," instead of being a t_ character of the thing itself, is only a subjective addition
on our part.
7. Subjective.Cbjective.. The Question of Truth
To see how little, indeed, is said by the statement that
"this" is only a "subjective" determination of the thing is
recognizable from the fact that we are just as justified in
calling it "objective,'' ·fQr objectum means something
thrown against you. The ''this" means a thing insofar as it
faces us, I.e .• it is objective. What a "this" is daes not depend
upon our caprice and our pleasure. But even if it depends
on us, it also equally depends upon the things. This
only is clear, that such determinations as the "this,"
which we use in the everyday experience of the things,
are not as self-evident as they may appear to be. It remains
absolutely questionable which kind of truth concerning
the thing is contained in the determination of it
as a "this.'' IL js q"ertionable 'vbich kind of truth in
. :general we bave of things in our daily experit;nce, whether
it Js subjectiye or objective. whether both togetl\er or
neither..
Up to now we have only seen that beyond the sphere of
daily experiences the things also stand in different truths
(the sun of the shepherd and of the astrophysicist, the
ordinary table and the scientific table). Now it becomes
clear that the truth about the sun for the shepherd, the
truth about the ordinary table, e.g., the determination
"this sun" and "this table"-this truth about the "this''
-remains opaque in its essence. How shall we ever say
something about the thing without being sufficiently inV
tlJ"io;us Ways of Questioning About the Thing 27
structed about the kind of truth which is proper to it?
At the same time we can state the opposite question: How
are we to knlOW something about the essential truth of the
thing if we do not know the thing itself to determine
what kind of truth can and must be proper to it?
It is now clear: to go straight to the things cannot be
carried out, not because we shall be stopped on the way
but because those determinations at which we arrive and
which we attribute to the things themselves-space, time, l
and "this"-·present themselves as determinations which. l.
do not belon,g to the things themselves.
On the other hand, we cannot invoke the common an·
swer which says that if detenninations are not ''objectiv_.
e" they are "s~bj.ectiye." 'tv:;!~:e;!!~;L':::O~"
ne1ther, that the disqnctJOOlji _!l -~--~-.. !..
and with it the subject-object rela~onshi~itself. is a
hiJily guesti~onable, though generalij fayored, sphere of
retreat for pllilosophy.
Hardiy a stratifying position-so it seems. There is no
information about the thingness of the thing without
knowledge of the kind of truth in which the thing stands.
But there is no information about this truth of the thing -
without kno,vledge of the thingness of the thing whose
truth is in qu•estion.
Where are ·we to get a foothold? The ground slips away
under us. Per.haps we are already close to falling into the
well. At any rate the housemaids are already laughing.
And what if only we ourselves are these housemaids, i.e.,
if we have se:cretly discovered that all this talk of the
"this," as Wf~ll as similar discussions, is fantasy and
empty!
The worst. however (not for our daily livelihood but
for philosophy), would be- if we wanted to escape from
the above bacll position by trying to steal away on some
cland~stine pa.th. We could say: our everyday experiences
arc stdl reliable; this chalk is this chalk, and I take it if I
28 WHAT" IS A THING?
need it and leave it aside if I do not. This is as clear as
day., certainly, if we are concerned about daily use. But
now it is a question of what the thingness of this thing is
and whether the ••this'' is a true characteristic of the thing
itself. Perhaps we still have not understood the "this" sufficiently
clearly. We renew our question of whence and
how the truth of a thing as a ''just this" (je dieses) is detennined.
Here we come upon an observation which
Hegel has already made in his Phenomenology of Mind.•
To be sure, the approach (AH.Satz),level (E·bene)r and in·
tention (Absicht) of Hegel's way of thinking are of a
different kind.
The suspicion arose that a thing's characteristic as
"just this" is only subjective. since this characteristic depends
Qn the standpoint of the experiencing individual
and the time point in which, on the part of the subject, the
experience of a thing happens to be made.
Why is the chalk "just this" and no other? Only because
it is just right here now. The"here'' and the "now" make
it to be "this." With the demonstrative characteristic
"tbis" we refer to the "here," i.e., to a place, to a space,
and, equally, to the now, i.e., time. We already know this,
at least in general. Let us now' pay special attention to
the truth about the chalk: "Here is the chalk." That is a
truth; the here and the now hereby characterize the chalk
so that we emphasize by saying: the chalk, which means
"this." However, this is almost too obvious. almost offeno
It is interesting to compare Heidegger's analysis of "this'' with
that of Hegel. whom he apparently has in mind throughout this
section. For Hegel, at the level of sensory experience, "pure being"
breaks into "thises'': "I" on the one hand and "object" on the
other. Together they make up "the This." The This exists in the
two(old form of tbe Now and the Here. But Hegel wants to establish
that the Now and Here, as well as the This, are Universals.
It is not the individual thing that continues to maintain itself but
the .liow and Here. (G. F. W. Hegel, Phenomenolo~tv of Mind. J. B.
Baillie, trans. [2nd ed.; New York: Macmillan Co., 1949], section
A. 1. 151-52.) Trans.
Various Ways of Questioning About the Thing 29
sively self.evident. But we want to do something ~ore
and t~laborate still further the self-evident truth about
the chalk. We even want to write down this truth about
the chalk to avoid losing this great valuable.
For this purpose we take a scrap of paper and we write
the truth down: "Here is the chalk." We lay this written
staternent beside the thing of which it is the truth. After
the le:cture is finished both doors are opened, the classroom
is aired, there will be a draft, and the scrap of paper-,
let us suppose, will flutter out into the corridor. A student
finds it on his way to the cafeteria_, reads the sentence
"Here! is the chalk," and ascertains that this is not true at
all. Through the draft the truth has become an untry.th,
StranJge-rhat a hachi!fld ;t'P!f on a enst of wind.
U..!!!!!#[ ;hilosophers t eac o er that the truth is
§91DilU!' _ wiliCb: IS va1id m 'tsi!f Wl1e11 ts §Yond tGe
and · temal and woe to himwo sa s that truth is not
eternal. That means relativism, w ·.i t es a evc;ry·
tliing is only relatively true, only partly true, and that
nothin1g is fixed any longer. Such doctrines are called
nihilis.m. Nihilism, nothingness, philosophy of anxiety,
tragedy. unheroic, philosophy of care and woe-the catalog
of these cheap titles is inexhaustible. Contemporary
man shudders at such titles,. and, with the help of the
shuddc:r thus evoked, the given philosophy is contradicted.
What wonderful times when even in philosophy
one need no longer think, but where someone somewhere,
occasionally, on higher authority, cares to provide shud·
dcring[ And now the truth should even depend on a draft!
Should it? I ask whether perhaps it Is not so.
But finally, this simply depends upon the fact that we
have w·ritten only half of the truth and entrusted it to an
unstable scrap of paper. uHere is the chalk and right
1lDW." 1Wc want to define this 4'now" more exactly. So that
the wriittcn truth will not be exposed to the draft, we in·
tend tc• put the truth about the "now," and thus about
30 WHAT IS A THING?
the chalk, on a blackboard. Now-when now? We write
on the blackboard: ''Now it is afternoon." All right, just
now, this afternoon. We suppose that after the lecture
the classroom will be locked up so that no one can creep
to the written truth and secretly falsify it. Only early the
next morning the custodian is permitted to enter and to
clean the blackboard. He reads the truth: "Now it is after·
noon." And he finds that the statement is untrue and that
this professor has made a mistake. The truth became an
untruth overnight.
What a remarkable t111th! All the more remarkable
since every time we want sure information about the
chalk, it itself is here and always now here, a thing present
here and now. What changes is always nn)f tbe d-•ermination
of_ the "here" and "pow , apd. accordingly, of the
L thih~ ... But the chalk remains alwars a Utbis, TbeQ:fore,
in s lte of everythin , these determinations belo the . ' . . nne "this .. is a general Charas;teristjc -ef the
thini·'P beT(: s to its thiiijiess. But the generality Df
the ''this'' demands geneiilly always to be detennined as
particular (jeweilige ). The chalk could not be for us what
it is,. that is, "a" chalk, i.e., "-this chalk" and no other,
were it not always a now and here. Of course, we shall say
that for rts the chalk is always a "this!' But we finally
want to know what the chalk is for itself4 For this purpose
we have made the truth about the chalk independent of us
and have entrusted it to a scrap of paper and the blackboard.
And observe; while jp truth some*bi~ut the
Q)alk itself was to be truly preserved the tnztb ehanged
into untruth:
l'his gtves us a hint for approaching the truth about
the chalk in another way, namely, instead of entrusting
this truth to a scrap of paper or to the blackboard, to
keep it with us, to guard it much more carefully than we
have so far done, whereby we drop our peculiar fear before
subjectivism or perhaps even endure it. So it could be
that the more we understand the truth about the chalk a5
llarious Ways of Questioning About the Thing 31
our tntth, the more we come closer to what the chalk itself •
is. It has been shown to us more than once that the truth
about a thing is connected with space and time. Therefore,
w·e also may suspect that we shall come closer to the
thing itself if we penetrate into the essence of space and
time, although it always again appears as though space
and tin1e are only a frame for the thing.
Finally, the question shall arise whether the truth conceminl"
the thing is only something that is carried to the
thing and pinned on it with the help of a scrap of paper
-or w·hether, on the contrary, the thing itself hangs
withill the truth, just as it does in space and time, whether
lhe tru1th is not such that it neither depends on the thing,
nor lies; in us, nor stands somewhere in the sky.
All our reflections up to :now have presumably led to
no othe~r conclusion than that we do not yet know either
the ins or outs of the thing and that we only have a great
confusi•on in our heads. Certainly, that was the intention
-of co1urse, not to leave us in this confusion. but to let
us kno,w that this happy-go-lucky advance toward the
things has its special circumstances in the moment.
Therein we wish to know how it is with the thingness of
the thing.
If we now remember our position at the beginning. we
can detcmnine, on the basis of our intentional and pecu.
liar que~stioning back and forth, why we have not come
closer l•:> .the thing itself. We began with the statement:
Things around us are single, and these single things are
"just these." With this latter characteristic we reached
the reabn of reference to the things; seen in reverse: the
realm of how things meet us. Reference and encounterthat
means generally the realm -iri wntCh we, the alleged
~ubjects. also reside. When we attempt to grasp this realm
we always run into space and time. We called it "timespac~,''
:which makes reference and encounter possible.
!his l~ tJhc realm which lies around things and manifests
Itself 1n the compulsive bringing up of space and time.
32 WHAT IS A THING?
B. The Thing as the Bearer of Properties
Perhaps we can never experience anything concerning
things and make out anything about them except as we
remain in the realm in which they encounter us. Mean·
while, we cannot get loose from the question whether or
not we approach the things themselves, at least Within this
realm, whether in it we aren't always already with them.
If this is so, then starting from here we shall make out
something about the things themselves, i.e., we shall
acquire some conception ( Vorstellung) of how they themselves
are constructed. It is decidedly advisable to disregard
the frame around things and look exclusively at
their construction. In any case, this way exerts as strong a
claim, as the previous on~.
We again ask: "What is a thing? How does a thing
look?" Though we are looking for the thingness of the
thing, we now cautiously go to work, stopping first at the
single things, looking at them, and holding fast to what is
seen. A rock-it is hard, gray. and has a rough surface;
it has an irregular form, is heavy, and consists of this and
that substance. A plant-it has roots, a stem, foliage. The
latter is green and grooved. The stem of the foliage is
short, etc. An animal has eyes and ears and can move from
place to place: it has, in addition to the sense organs,
equipment for digestion ~d sexual reproduction-organs
which it uses, generates, and renews in a certain way ..
Along with the plant, which also has organs, we call this
thing an organism. A watch has gears, a spring, a dial, etc.
In this way we could continue indefinitely. What we
ascertain thereby is correct~ The statements we make are
taken from a faithful fitting to what things themselves
show us. We now ask more definitely: As what do the
things show themselves to us? We disregard that they are
a rock, rose, dog, watch, and other things and only cOnsider
what things are in general: a thing is always someVar
·iou.s Ways of Questioning About the Thing 33
thing that has such and such properties. alw~ys something
that is constituted in such and such a way. This
something is the bearer of the properties: the something,
as it were, underlies the qualities. This something is what
endures, .and we always return to it again as the same
when we are in the process of determining the qualities.
This is how things themselves are. What accordingly is a
thing? It i:s a nucleus around which many changing qualities
are grouped, or a bearer upon which the qualitieS.
rest; something that possesses something else in itself
(an sich). However we twist and turn it, this is how the
constructiion of things shows itself; and around them are 'v
space and. time, as their frame. This is all so intelligible I'
and self-e11ident that one almost shuns lecturing expressly
on such commonplaces. All is so very plain that one does
not understand why we make such a fuss and still talk
about "this" and about questionable metaphysical prin·
ciples. abc,ut steps of truth and so forth. We said that the
inquiry ought to move within the realm of everyday experience.
,What is closer than to take things as they are?
We could continue the description of the things still further
and say: If one thing changes its qualities, this can
have an eBect upon another thing. Things affect each
other and resist one another. From such relations between
things. further qualities then derive which things
also again "have.''
This description of things and their interdependence
corresponds to what we call the "natural conception of
the world .. " "Naturally"-since here we remain completely
un:atural'' and disregard all the profound metaphysics
a:nd extravagant and useless theories about
knowlcdgt~. We remain "natural" and also leave to things
themselves their own "nature," . 1r we no•w allow philosophy to join in. and we question
1!· tt beco·mes clear that philosophy too from Mtient
ltrnes has :said nothing else. That the thing is a bearer of
many qLtalitics was already said by Plato and above all by
34 WHAT IS A THING?
Aristotle. Later on perhaps it was expressed in other
words and contepts. However, basically the meaning is
always the same, even when the philosophical "positions''
are as different as, for instance, those of Aristotle and
Kant. Thus, Kant states in the Critique of Pure Re4Son
(A 182: N .K.S., p. 212 )7 as a principle: "All appearances
(i.e., all the things for us) contain the permanent (substance)
as the object itself, and the changeable as its mere
determination, that is, as a way in which the object
ex-ists."
What then is a thing? Answer: A thing is the existing
~ (vorhanden) bearer of many existing (vorhanden) yet
changeable properties.
This answer is so "natural" that it also dominates scientific
thought, not only •• theoretical n thought but also all
intercourse with things, their calculation and evaluation.
We can retain the traditional determination of the
essence of the thingness of things in the familiar and
usual titles:
l. V.O~ettpo~.,s ,--uui'IJf/l'I""-
Foundation ( Unterlage )-what always already
(what underlies) stands along with, and
2. Substantia
3. The bearer ( Triger)
4. Subject
also comes in along with
-accidens
-properties
(Eigenschaften)
-predicate
'i References to the Critique of Pure Reason accord with Raymund
Schmidt, Philosophische Bibliothek (Hamburg: Verlag
Meiner, 1956). In the Preface to the fourteenth edition. written in
1930, Schmidt expresses his special thanks to E. Franck in Marburg~
Norman Kemp Smith in Edinburgh. and M. Heidegger in
Freiburg for their valuable suggestions. ••A" refers to the first edition
and ••s" to the second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason.
"N.K.S." refers to the translation by Norman Kemp Smith (Lon ..
don, 1929).
References to quotations Heidegger utilizes from the Critique
of Pure Ret~son remain in the text as they were originally placed.
Occasionally we have given translations in footnotes when
Heidegger has given only references. Trans.
B·~ocdpNP: Derived from ilrirc~tpa.t. In ancient philosophy
Various Ways of Questioning About the Thing 35
9. The Essential Construction of the Truth,
the Thing. and the Proposition
The 9Ute!,tion "What is a thing?" has lonJ been decided
widi gencm' aetisfastion. i.e., the~estion 1s QijVIous!Y no
longer a ffl'"'i?D
Moreo,rer, the answer to the question, i.e., the definition
of the thing as the present-at-hand ( vorhanden) bearer
of properties present-at-~d on it, has been established
(and in i1ts tnifh is at any time capable of being established)
in such ·a way that it C8Illiot lk improved upon. For
the establishing is also "natural" and. therefore, so familiar
that one must especially emphasize it even to notice it.
Wherein lies this basis for the truth of the familiar c:leterminati4lD
of the essence of the thing? Answer:. In noth·
ing less thl&D the essence of truth itself. Truth-what does
it mean? The true is what is valid; what is valid corresponds
to the facts. Something corresponds to the facts
when it is directed to them, i.e., when it fits itself to what
the things: themselves are. Truth, therefore, is fitting (Antnessung)
to· tb.ings. Obviously, not only do single truths
have to suit themselves to single things, but the essence
of truth na.ust also. If truth is correctness, a directing-to
( Sich-rich:ten) . , • then this must obviously be really valid
t'•Jrorctl,.e•o• s:ignified the foundatiOn in which something else could
inhere, alsc• what is implied or presupposed by something else.
But at leas'~ three senses must be disti.quished: (1) '"'" (matter),
the substrsLte that received fonn. The s~lled material cause
(Aristotle:!,. Metaphysics, 983• 30): (2) the substance. including
mat lcr and fonn, in which the accidents ( t~t~p.flafJ,IC6r) inhere (ibid.,
98311 16). It is interesting that Aristotle says of the substance:
~at ")·qp4J o~dia '" Tc real dh Tl "711U'lna, C:.r f~Ja,ae• (Metaphysics, 103'7b 28).
Fo~ substance means a 'one' and a 'this,' as we maintain.'' (The
d
Rnsrc Worlc:s of Aristotle, Richard McKeon, ed. [New York: Ran~
m liousc, 1941 ], p. 803.) See also the comment of W. D. Ross on
thhas pa~sage: in Aristotle's Metaphysics (Oxford. 1953). U, 205: (3)
l t! logacal subject to which attributes and properties are predicated
.<Metc'lphysics, l03b 5).
1-!::•deggc~r takes account of (2) and (3) only. He uses Triiger,
:~~ bearer·," as the most general term to include all that tradilOnally
was meant by the l..-orc•iJ&uo• and substanliG. Trans.
36 WHAT IS A THING?
all the more for the essential determination of the truth.
It must fit itself to the essence of the thing (its thingness ).
It is necessary from the essence of .truth as fitting that the
structure of things be reflected in the structure of truth.
If we thus come upon the same framework ( Gefilge} in
the essential structure ( Wesensbau) of truth as in the es ..
sential structure of the things, then the truth of the familiar
determination of the essential structure of the thing is
demonstrated from the essence of truth itself.
Truth is a fitting tttthings, j.GOITr'Q2ndence ( tJbereinSitrnmungfWiffi
&e in,. But what is now the charactt;r
of what fits Itself' wStoes the corresponding? What is
this about which we say it ·may be true or .false? Just as it
is "naturar• to understand truth as correspondence to the
things, so we naturally determine what is true or false. The
truth which we find, establish, disseminate, and defend we
express in words. But a single word-such as door, chalk,
large, but, and-is neither true nor false. Only combinations
of words are true or false: The door is closed: the
chalk is white. Such a combination of words is called a
simple assertion. Such an assertion is either true or false.
The assertion is thus the place and seat of the truth. Therefore,
we likewise simply say: This and that assertion are
truths. Assertions are truths and falsities.
What is the structure of such a truth as assertion? What
is an assertion? The name "assertion" is ambiguous. We
distinguish four meanings, all of which belong together.
and only in this unity, as it were, do they give a complete
outline of the structure of an assertion:
assertions of (Aussagen von) -proposition (Satz)
assertions about (Aussagen uber )-information
(Auskunft)
assertions to .(Aussagen an) -communication
(Mitteilung)
to declare oneself ( Sich· ·-expression
Ausspreclzen) (Ausdnlclc)
Someone called to court as a witness refuses to give a
Various W(Lys of.Questioning About the Thing 37
deposition (Aussage), i.e., in the first place, he does not
speak out, he keeps what he knows to himself. Here assertion
meansi communicating, speaking out into the open,
in contrast to silent concealment (Verschweigung). If the
assertion is made it does not consist mostly of single incoherent
vvords, but is a report (Bericht). The witne_~~
who dlecides to give a deposition tells (erziihlt). In
this report the state of factsis asserted. The assertions
set forth the event, e.g., what occurred and the circumstances
of a just observed burglary attempt. The witness
asserts: Tbe house lay in darkness, the shutters were
closed, etc.
The assei1ion in the wider sense of communication consists
of "assertions" in the narrower sense~ i.e., of propositions.
Asserting something in the narrower sense does not
mean speaking out, but it means telling information about
the house, i1ts condition, and the entire state of things. To
assert now means in view of the situation and circumstances
to say something about it from them, as seen frQm
their point 4:>f view. Assertion, that is giving information
about .... This information is given in such a way that
assertions are made about what is under consideration,
about which information is given. Thirdly, assertion
means to talk starting from that· which is under consideration,
e.g.,. from the house, to take what belongs to the
house, to attribute to it what properly belongs to it, to
ascribe it, bespeak it. What is asserted in this sense we
call the predicate. Assertion in the third sense is "predicalivc";
it is the proposition.
Assertion, therefore, is threefold: a proposition giving 1
information and which. when carried out vis-a-vis others, ~
becomes con1munication~0 This communication- is correct
. ''~pare 1this summary of the threefold character of asser·
l tun ~hh SZ. p. 156: "'When we take together tbe three analyzed
lllcurungs or 'a:ssertion' in a unified view of the complete phenome~
nn, ~ n:tay define assertion as a communicative and determinaavc
pomtmg 01~t."' Sein und Zeil (Tubingeo: Max Niemeyer, 1957),
&)'mbolizcd by usz. ·~ Trans.
38 WHAT IS A THING?
Various Ways of Questioning About the Thing 39
10. The .Historicity (Geschichtlichkeit): of the
.Defirtltion of the. Thing
It was shown that the answer to the question "What is
a thing?" is the following: A thing is the bearer of properties,
and the ceJrresponding truth has its seat in the assertion,
the prop()sition, which is a connection of subject and
predicate. We said that this answer as well as the reason
for it is quitee natural. We now only ask: What doe~
··~wrai'~P- here?
We call ,.na1tural" ( natiirlich) what is understood without
further ad•:> and is "self .evident" in the realm of every·
day understanding. For instance, the internal construction
of a big bombt~r is by itself understandable for an Italian
engineer, but J~or an Abyssinian from a remote mountain
village such a thing is not at all "natural." It is not ~Ifevident,
i.e., not understandable in comparison to anything
with whi.ch such a man and his tribe have everyday
familiarity. F()r the Enlightenment the "natural" was
what could be~ proved and comprehended according to
certain detemdnate principles of reason based upon itself,
which wat;, therefore, appropriate· to every human as
such and to mankind in general. In the Middle Ages every ..
thing was "n;aturar· which obtained its essence, its
natura, from God and. because of this origin, could then
form and pres·erve itself in a definite mode without further
interventi•:Jn from God. What was natural to a man of
the eighteenth •century, the rationality of reason as such in
general, set frc:re from any other limitation, wotdd have
seemed very urmatural to the medieval man. Also the conI
rnry could bcc.ome the case, as we know from the French
Revolution. Th•erefore. it follows: What is "natural" is not
''.natural"' at all, here meaning self.evident for any given
ever-existing man. The .. natural" is always historical ..
.. A suspicion c:reeps up from behind us. What if this so
natural .. appearing essential definition of the thing were
40 WHAT IS A THING?
by no means s~lf-evident, were not .,natural''? Then there
must have been a time when the essence of the thing was
not defined in this way. Consequently, there also must
haVe been a time when the essential definition of the thing
was first worked out. The formation of this essential definition
of the thing did not, then, at some time just fall
absolute from heaven, but would have itself been based
upon very definite presuppositions.
This is in fact so. We can pursue the origin of this essential
definition of the thing in its main outline in Plato
and Aristotle. Not only this, but at the same time and in
the same connection with the disclosure of the thing, the
proposition as such was also first discovered and, similarly,
that the truth as correspondence to the thing bas its
seat in the proposition. The so-called natural determina·
tion of the ,essence of the truth-from which we have
drawn a proof for the correctness of the essential defini·
tion of the thing, this natural concept of the truth-is,
therefore, not .,natural" without more ado.
Therefore, the "natural world-view" (natU.rliche Welt·
ansicht ), to which we have constantly referred, is not self·
evident. It remains questionable. In an oytstandjDLs ense
this overworked rm "nat " · · historical.
So i cou e that in our natural wor - • w we have · n
dominate a centuries-ol inter retation of the thingness.,
gf dle thing, w e t · actua y encounter us quite
different~. This answer to our interJl.."Cte question o the
meaning of "natural" will prevent us from thoughtlessly
taking the question "What is a thingt' as settled. This
question seems only now to be becoming more clearly determined.
The question itself has become a historical one.
As we, apparently untroubled and unprejudiced, encounter
things and say that they are the bearers of proper- l ties, it is not we who are seeing and speaking but rather an
old historical tradition. But why do we not want to leave
this history alone? It does not bother us. We can adjust
ourselves quite easily with this conception oC things. And
Various Way,s of Questioning About the Thing 41
suppose we acknowledge the history of the disclosure and X
interpretation of thingness of .the thing? This changes
nothing in the things: the streetcar goes no differently
than before_, the chalk is a chalk, the rose is a rose, rhe cal
is a cat.
We emphasized in the first hour that philosophy is that
thinking with which we can begin to do nothing immediately.
But Jterhaps mediately we can, i.e., under certain
conditions ;!lDd in ways no longer obviously seen as forged
by philosophy and as capable of being forged only by it.
Under certain conditions: if, for example, we undertake
the effort to• think through the inner state of .today's natural
science$, non-biological as well as biological. if we
also think through the relation of mechanics and technology
to our ~dstenee (Dasein},1
" • at
knowledge ana qtieslionm . reached l"mits
whiCti demc•nstra at ct ori · referen to
things ts m1ssm , t at it is onl. simulated b s
o Iscover••'s an tecllnt suq;esses 1 We feel that what
zoo ogy andl botany investigate conr.eming animals and
plants and .bow they investigate it may be correct. But
are they still animals arid plants? Are they not machines
duly prepared beforehand of which one afterward even
admits that they are ''cleverer than we"?
We can, o:f course, spare ourselves the effort of thinking
these paths through. We also can, furthermore, stick to
what we find "natural.'' that is, something with which one
''' Dasein: Litera1ly. "being-there.'' IC is a common German
~~ord applicable to the presence of any thing. It is often transIterated
in El11glish. Heideggcr's use of the term refers to man's
uwn unique way of existing in contra.,t to other entities. Trans.
u Jn Die F.rage nach der Teclmilc (Pfullingen: Verlag Neske,
1962), p. 13, Heidegger points out the danger in the progress of
modern technology for man to misinterpret the meaning of technulogy:
" ..• endangered man boasts himself as the master of
H'lrtb.'" Everything man encounters appears entirely as man-made.
?wcyer, true· thinking leads one to see technology (,.e~rl"')) as that
b~ wh1cb the forces of Nature arc challenged to the revelation and
unconccalednc~s of the truth (clMB.-a•). TrQHS.
42 WHAT IS A THING?
thinks no further. We can take this thoughtlessness as a
standard for .the things. The streetcar then goes exactly
• as before. The decisions which are made or not made do
not take place in the streetcar or on the motorcycle. but
somewhere else-that is, in the sphere of historical free·
dom, i.e .• where a historical being (Dasein) decides its
ground, as well as how it decides, what level of freedom of
knowledge it will choose and what it will posit as freedom.
These decisions are different at differing periods and
among different peoples. They cannot be forced. With the
)
freely chosen level of the actual freedom of knowledge,
i.e., with the inexorableness of questioning, a people al·
1 ways posits for itself the degree of its being (Daseiu). The
Greeks saw the entire nobilit}' of their existence in. the
abilitv to ~'Jron. lhetr ability to questton was their
stanef!l"d tt;;)jritin@.ishtnj! themselves ftom those who
did not bave it.;tnd did not want it. They al}led tliem
barb;i';ians.
we can leave alone the question of our knowledge about
the things and suppose that someday it will set itself right
on its own. We can admire the achievements of today's
natural sciences and technology and need not know how
they got that way, that. for instance, modem science·only
became possible by a dialogue carried on (out of the earliest
passion for questioning) with ancient knowledge, its
concepts, and its principles. We need know nothing and
can believe we are such magnificent men that the Lord
must have given it to us in our sleep.
But we can also be convinced of the indispensability of
questioning, which must exceed everything up to now in
significance, depth, and ce.;;titude. because only in this
way can we master what otherwise races away beyond us
in Hs self-evidence.
Decisions are not made by proverbs but only by work.
We decide to question, and in a very detailed and drawn
out way, which for centuries remains only a questioning.
Meanwhile, others can safely bring home their truths.
Various Ways of Questioning Abo,•t the Thing 43
Once durintg his lone walks Nietzsche wrote down the sentence:
"Enormous self-reflection! ro become conscious
not as an iJradividual but as mankind. Let us reflect, let us
think back: let us go all the small and the great ways!"
(Will to Power [Wille lUr Macht], §585 ).
We go hc!re only a small way, the little way of the little
question •• ,Nbat is a thing?" We concluded that the defini.,
tions whiclb seem so self-evident arc not "natural.'' The
answers we: give were already established in ancient times.
When we a'pparently ask about the thing in a natural and
unbiased Vltay, the question already expresses a prelim\i
nary opinicm about the thingness of the thing. History a~
ready speaks through the type of question. We therefo~
say tha. t this question is a historical one.. Therein lies
definite direction for our purposes, should we desire t
ask the qut!stion with sufficient understanding. _
What shc:>uld we do if the question is a historical orre?
And what does .,historical" mean? ln the .first place we
only establish that the common answer to the question
about the t:bing stems from an earlier, past time. We can
establish tbat since that time the treatment of this ques.
lion has gone through various although not earthshaking
changes, sa that different theories about the thing, about
the propc;lsition, and about the truth regarding the thing
have regularly emerged through the centuries. Thereby it
can be sho~m that the question and the answer have, so to
speak, their history, i.e., they already have a past. But this
ls just what we do not mean when we say that the question
"What is a thing?" is historical, because every report of
the past, thut is of the preliminaries to the question about
the thing, is. concerned with something that is static. This
kind of historical reporting (historischen Berichts) is an
l"Xplicit shutting down of history, whereas it is, after all,
a happening. We question historically if we ask what is
M~ll happening even if it seems to be past. We ask what is
shll happenjog and whether we remain equal to this hapPening
so that it can really develop.
44 WHAT JS A THING?
11. Truth-Proposition (Asserlion.)-Thing
There can be various forms and reasons for the quiescence
of the happenings of ancient times. Let us ·see how
Vanious Ways of Questioning About the Thing 45
it is with c•ur question in this respecJ; We hard that jn the
time of Pl:ato and Aristotle the definitjgn of the thing was
set forth as the bearer of ~operties. The discovery of the
essence ol the propo5itinn was made at the same tiiDe
Also simulltaneouslyarose the characterization of the truth
us the fitti!!j of the perception to the things, which truth
has its sta.ce in the proposition. All this can be presented
in· detai aiiCrunequivocafiy ftonrthe discussions and essays
of Plato and Aristotle. We also can point out how
these teac1nmgs about the thing, the truth, and the proposition
cha1nged with the Stoics; furthermore, how again
differences appeared in medieval Scholasticism, and some
others in our modern times, and again, still others in
German Idealism. Thus, we would tell a .. history" ( Ges·
chichte) about this question, but not ask historically at
all, i.e., we· would, thereby, leave the question "What ~sa
thing?" co_mpletely quiescent. The movement would then
consis.t.onl~y in the fact that, with thehelpofareportabout
theories, vve may contrast these with one another. We
bring the question "What is a thing?'' out of its quiescence
by inscrtit1g the Platonil1-Aristotelian determinations of
the thing, the proposition·and the truth into specific possibilities,
and by putting these up for decision .. We ask: Do
the definition of the essence of the thing and the definition
of the esseJBce of the truth occur at the same time only by
accident, o~r do they all cohere among themselves, perhaps
even necessarily? If such proves to be the case. how do
these defini:tions cohere? Obviously. we have already given
an answer 1to this question when we refer to what has been
dtcd to pr·ove the correctness of the essential definition
of the lhin;g. Thereby, it is demonstrated that the definition
of the essential structure of truth must conform to
the esscntiul structure of things on the basis of the essence
ot truth as correctness (Richtigkeit ). This establishes a
Cl'rlain intc:rdependencc between the essence of the thing,
ur a propo!dtiont and o£ truth. This also shows itself externally
in 1the order of the determination of the thing and
46 WHAT IS A THING?
the proposition according to which the subject-predicate
relationship is fourth (cf. p • .34 ). We should certainly not
forget that we cited the reference to the so viewed connection
as the opinion of the common and "natural" conception
of this question. But this "natural" opinion is absolutely
not natural. This means that its supposed firmness
dissolves itself into a series of questions. These run as fol-
\/.lows: Was the essential structure of truth and of the propf'
osition suited to the structure of the things? Or is it the
opposite: Was the essential structure of the thing as a
( bearer of attributes interpreted according to the structure f~ of the proposition, as the unity of 11subject" and "ptedi-
• • cate'.'.? .Has man read off the structure of the proposition
0~ fr the structUre of ilie thin s. or has be transferre=a the
· sttpcttire o t proposition into t e t 1np.
( " If the latter were the case, then the further question
·L.t' :;)- would immediately arise: How does the proposition, the
r,.el interpretation, come to present the measure and model of
~.HI( how things in their thingness ate to be determined? Since r -. 1 the proposition, the..JSSertion, the positing, and the telllhg
(Jf /'lJ are human aclions, we would coficlude that rP!jl does..not
~·t· adjust liimself tOthiniS buf tpe things to man and to the
~ hum~iuhjedaJts which one usyally understands the .,1 ''..,.
t.. Sucll~n interpretation of the relation of origin between
ru the determination of the thing and that of the proposition
~· seems improbable, at least among the Greeks. For the "I"
standpoint is something modem and, therefore, nonGreek.
The polis set the standard for the Greeks. Everyone
today is talking of the Greek polis. Now, among the
Greeks, the nation of thinkers, someone coined the sentence:
trdvTCIW XP"'JUiTWv p.l,.pn11 inTl11 ;:.,(}~, ,...;., p.Q, &vTwr ~
lUTtv, 'TWv & o\'" ovT•v ~ ov~e icrrw ("Man is the measure of all
.
\.. things, of things that are that they are, and of things that
" are not that they are not.") The man who made this statement,
Protagoras, supposedly wrote a work with the
simple title v ·A,\t;Bc"", The Truth. The statement of this
proposition is temporally not too far from Plato's time.
Varioru Ways of Questioning AbolCt the Thing 41
Perhaps this implies tha-t the structure of the thing adjusts
itself to the structure of the proposition, rather than the
contrary. not "subjectivism"; only later opinions about
the thinkin~;' of the Greeks are subjective. If, indeed. the X
proposition and that truth settled in the proposition,
understood as corr~tness, be the measure for the determination
of the thing; if now the facts are different and
reversed fro•m what natural opinion holds, then the further
questio•n arises: What is. the ground and guarantee
that we have~ really hit on the essence of the proposition?
Whence is it detennined what truth is?
Thus we sc~ that what happened in the determination of
the essence •:>f the thing is by no means past and settled,
but at most bogged .down and therefore to be set in motion
anew aJnd so still questionable today. If we do not
want simply to repeat opinions but to grasp what we ourselves
say and usually mean, then we immediately come
into a whole !turmoil of questions.
First of all, the question relative to the thing now .stands
thus: Do the essences of the proposition and of the truth
determine tbemselves from out of the essence of the thing. ;\· .
or does the essence of the thing detennine itself from o1,1t ,•
of the essence of the proposition? The question is posed as
an either/or. However (and this becomes the decisj;e
qu~stion).dctes iiiiseitbeiZnrhseiEsuffice? Are the essence
of Jhe thins and the essence of the prooosition only built
as mirror in1ges because bOtb n(them together determine
themselves f~om out of the_ same but deeper lying
root? However, what and where can be this common
ground for the essence of the thing and of the proposition
and of their clrigin? T~e uncond!tiont!4_(.Ultbedingt)? We
~tatcd at the beginning that Wliij:"t condi'tions the essence of
th~ thing in its thingness can no longer itself be thing and ··
conditioned, it must bean unconditioned (Un-bedingtes). ·
But also the •essence of the unconditioned (Unbedingt) is
~o-dctcrmined by what has been established ~sa thing and
as condition ( Be•dingung ). If the thing is taken as en~
48 WHAT IS A THING?
creatum,. a present-at-hand created by God, then the un·
conditioned is God in the sense of the Old Testament. tf
the thing is considered as that which, as object, faces the
"I," i.e., as the ' 4not-I,'' then the "I" is the unconditioned,
the absolute "I'' of German Idealism. Whether the unconditioned
is sought beyond, behind, or in things depends
upon what one understands as condition and being conditioned
(als Bedingung und Bedingtsein ).
Only with this question do. we advance in the direction
\
of the possible .around. for the dcterminatipn of the thing
and the proposition and its truth. This, however. ~2
the original ways of posing the questions conceriiUigihe
thing with which we began. That happening ( Geschehen)
of the formerly standard determination of the thing. which
seemed long past but was in truth only stuck and since
then rested, is brought out of its quiescence~ The question
of the thing again comes into motion from. its beginning.
With this reference to the inner questionability of the
question about the thing, we ought now to clarify in
\
what.sens. ewe take the q.uestion as. historical. ·To question
historically means to set free and into motion the happening
which is quiescent and bound in the question.
To be sure, such a procedure easily succumbs to ~ misinterpretation.
One could take this as belatedly attributing
mistakes to the original determination of the thing or at
least insufficiency and incompleteness. This would be a
childish game of an empty and vain superiority and afterthought
which all those latecomers may at any time play
with those of earlier times simply because they have come
later. Insofar as our questioning is concerned with critique
at all, it is not directed against the beginning, but only
against ourselves, insofar as we drag along this beginning
12 Heidegger entitles the section in SZ where be calls for a renewal
of the question of being from the standpoint of its
Tzistoricity, "The Task of the Destruction of th~ Hi$tory bf
Ontology" (SZ, p. 19). Trans.
Variow; Ways of Questioning About the Thing 49
no longer as such, but as something "natural," i.e., in an
indifferent falsification.
The concer,tion of the question "What is a thing?" as
historical is just as far removed from the intention of
merely reporting historically about former opinions about
the thing as it is from the mania for criticizing these opinions
and, by a1dding together what is temporarily correct.
from figurlns: out and offering a new opinion from past
opinions. RaJ]h!!:J! is a ·questjgn of seU;inr jptq motion the
original inner; bappenTns of this gu~ion according to its
simplest char!lcteristic move{, whicli have been ·ar~ested
in a quiescep,ce. This happening doe&· not He somewhere
aloof from w~ ·in tile dim and d~!~ant. past but is here in
cvecy pmposU~nn an~ in eac~ervday opinion, in every
approaM to dwtgs.
12. Historicity and Decision
What has been said about the historical character .of the
question "What is a thing?" is valid for every philosophical
question -vvhich we put today o.r in the future, ass.uming,
of course, that philosophy is a questioning that puts
itself in question and is therefore always and everywhere
moving in a c:ircle.
We noticed at the outset how the thing determined itself I
for us first as lSingle and as a ''this." Aristotle calls it TOB~ Tt, no
"this here." However, the determination of the singleness -::::::::::-(
Ein~elnheit) inherently depends also on huw the universality
of the universal is conceived, for which the single is * an inst;tncc and an example. Also, in this regard, ~rtairt
d~.~dsions set iin with Plato and Aristotle which still influ-
L.:ncc logic and grammar. We further observed that a Closer bJ
cin·umscripticln of the "this" always involves the help of ~
1hc space-time~ rclatio_· nship. Also wi. th regard to the. es~~ *· tial dctcnnincltion of space and time, Aristotle and Plato
sk~tched the \Yays on which we still move today.
In truth, however, our his·torkcd being-here (Dasein) is
so WHI\T IS A THING?
already on the way to a transformation wllich, if stifled
in itself, only experiences this destiny because it does. not
find its way back to its own self-laid grounds in order
to found itself anew out of them.
It is easy to derive from all that has been said what our
task must be, if we are to set our question "What is a
thing?" into motion as a historical question.
It would first be necessary to set into motion the beginning
of the essential determination of the thing and the
proposition of the Greeks, not in orde.r to acknowledge
how it was before .. but to pose for decision how essentially
it still is today. But in this lecture we must forego carry ..
ing O\lt this fundamental task, and this ·for two reasons.
The one is seemingly more external. The task mentioned
would not be fulfilled by putting together a few quotations
about what Plato and Aristotle said here and there
1 abgut the thing and the proposition. Rather, we would
have to bring into play the whole of Greek Dasein, its gods,
its art, its polity. its knowledge, in order to experience
what it means to discover something like the thing. In the
framework of this lecture all the presuppositions a.re missiQg
for this approach. And even if these were supplied we
could not follow this path to the beginning, in regard to
the task posed.
It has already been indicated that a mere definition of
the thing does not say much, whether Yle dig it out in the
past, or whether we ourselves have the ambition to solder
f together a so-called new one. The answer to the guesti~n
fA:() "What is a thJ;;v?" is differept in ~harac~~r~ It is not a
Y \, prop stUon btL a tr sformed baste posttion or, better
::;::::;::- still and more cautjqusl , t e tnttla trans anna ton o e
hit erto ex1stmg pos1tlon towar mgs, a c ange o question
an an ev ation of seeing an cca ng: 1n s o , of
the · eing-there (Da-sein 1n t e m1 st o w at IS 1nmr en
des Serenden ). !o determine The changing basic. positTon
within the relation to what is, that is the task of an entire
~historical period. But this requires that we perceive more
Variot4S Ways of Questioning About the Thing 51
exactly with clearer eyes what most holds us captive and ~
makes us unfree in the experience and determination of Ff'
the things. 1This is modern natural science, insofar as it r has become! a universal way of thinking along certain yt
basic lines. The Greek origin also governs this, although ___
changed, yelt not alone and not predominantly. The ques· --tion
concen1ing our basic relations to nature, our knowl- \{/
edge of natu.re as such. our rule over nature, is not a ques .. ~
tion of natural science, but this question is itself in . _/"
question in the quesJion of whether and how we are stU I VlD
addressed by what is as such within the whole. Such a--~
question is J:tot decided in a lecture, but at~ in a century,
and this onl if the · lee and does
not merely have the opinion that it is awake. This question
JS made: decisive onl throu discussion.
}n connec:tion wit development of modem science \
a defuli.te cclnceStion of the n~ attains a unique pre- r
c:minence. Accor ins to this, the t4~ is material. a point 1
of mass in nnotion in the ture ~ace-time order, or an ~ I
propriate combinatiQn 0 sue points. the thi~g so-a~: '
fined is frnn1.Then on consideredas the ground and basjs.., 1
of all things, their determinations and ihetr mterroption.
The animate~ is also here, insofar as one does not believe
that som.e d.ay one will be able to explam 1t from ou::f
Jifelesun'ill~th ~e help of colloidal chetpistey. EVen
where OlllU!:ennits the animate its own character jt i§ conceived
~s aJ!..,!{cfitional structure built upon the inanimate;
in the! same way, the implement and the tool are
considered as material things, only subsequently prepared,
so that a special value adheres to them. But this
reign of..!!!£ material thing (Stoffdingesl. as tJJ.e gennjpe l
substructur.eorall things, reaches altogether beyond the l
srhereJiDllii.Jhings into the sphere- of the "spiritual'~
~ Geistigen ), as we will quite roughly call it; for example,
1nto the sph•ere of the signification of language, of history,
of the work of art, etc. Why, for example, has the treatment
and interpretation of the poets for years been so
52 WHAT IS A THING?
dreary in our higher schools? Answer: »ecause the
\ teachers do not know the difference between a thinl and' a
\ poem; because they treat poems as things. whiCh t ·ey1lo
~ because the~ have nevergdiie dnougfi the ~uestion of what
~ a thing is. T at today one reads more N ildungenliea and
less Homer may have its reasons. but this changes nothing.
lt always is the same dreariness, before in Greek and
now in German. However, the teachers are not to bla e
fQr this situation, nor e eac ers o ese teac ers, but
an entire period, i.e .• we ourselves-de we do not finally
..., ·open our eyes. ·
The question "What is a thing? .. is a historical question.
In its history, the determination of the thing as the material
present·at..Jtand (Vorhanden) has an unsbattered
preeminence .. If we reaUy ask this que$t.ion, i.e., if we pose
for decision the possibility of the dete~iQation of the '/{thing. th':'l. we can as litt~e sk!P, the ntod~rn •ll?sw~r as: we 110 are penmue3 to forget the onp ot the-guest1on. ·
-::::;;. However, at the same time· and before ail we should
ask the harmless question ''What is a thing?" in such a
way that we experience it as our own so that it no longer
lets go of us even when we have Jong since bad no oppor·
tunity to listen to lectures on it, especially since the task
of such lectures is not to proclaim great revelations an4
to calm psychic distress. Rather, they can only perhaps
awaken what bas fallen asleep, perhaps put back into
order what has become mixed up.
13. Summary
We now summarize in order to arrive at the final
.delineation of our intention. It was emphasized at the out-
/
set that in philosophy, in contrast to the sciences, an
immediate approach to the questions is never possible. It
necessarily always requires an introduction. The introdu~
tory reflections on our question "What is a thing?'' now
come to their conclusion. ~·
, I
Various Ways of Questioning About the Thing 53
The question has been characterized in two essential re.
spccts: What is put in question and how it is questioned.
First, witb regard to what is in question-the thingwith
an admiittedly very poor light we have searched the
horizon in which, according to tradition, the thing and the
determination of its thingness stand. We reached a double
result: first, the frame of the th'ing, time-space, and the
thing's way of encountering, the "this, .. and then· the
structure of the thing itself as being the bearer of properties,
entireJly general and empty: to form the one for a
many.
Second, we: tried to characterize the question in regard
to the manne:r in which it must ·be asked. It turned out
that the ques1tion is historical. What is meant by that has
been explained.
The introductory reflection on our question makes it
clear that two leading questions permanently go along
with it and, therefore, must be asked with it. The one: J
Where does something like a thing belong? The other: 1
Whence do w·e take the determination of its thingness? ·
Only from the·se as they are asked along with our question
result the clue and guideline along which we must go if
everything is not to tumble around in mere chance and
confusion andl if the question concerning the thing is not
to get stuck in a dead end.
But would ,that be a misfortune? This is the same que.~tion
as the foUowing: Is there, after all, a serious sense in
posing such q1LJestions? We know that we cannot begin to
do anything ~vith its elucidation .. The consequences are
also accordin&:ly if we do not pose the question and ignore
it. If we ignore~ the warning of a high-power Une and touch
the wires, we lEU~ killed. If we ignore the question ~~what
is a thing?" then 11nothing further happens."
If a physicLan mishandles a number of patients, there
is the danger that they will lose their lives. If a teacher
interprets a pc:>em to his students in an impossible manncr,
"nothing further happens .. " But perhaps it is good if
54 WHAT IS A THING?
we speak more cautiously here. JU ignorin' the question
concepling the thing and by insufficiently 1Dtemreting a
poem, it a~pears as thou~h nothin~ further hap~. One
day .,Peiha3after fifty or pe hunllect years, neve eli$,-
something has happened.
The question "What is a thing?" is a historical question.
But it is more important to act according to this historical
character in the questioning than to talk about the historical
character of the question. Herewith, for the purposes
and possibilities of the lecture, we must be content with
an evasive way out.
We can neither present the great beginning of the qu~
tion with the Greeks, nor is it possible, in its full context,
to display the precise determination of the thing. which
has become preeminent through modern science. But, on
the other hand, the knowledge of that beginning as well as
of the decisive periods of modem science is indispensable
if we are to remain equal to the question at all.
B. KANT's MANNER OF AsKING ABoUT THB THING
i. The Historical Basis on Which Kant's
Critique of Pure ReGson Rests
How do we. nevertheless, although in an improvised
manner, ~~et on the path (Weg) to the intrinsic "living"
history of our question? We choose a middle section of
this way, one in which, in a creative senseJ the beginning
and a decisive age are joined together in a new manner.
This is the philosophical determination of the thingrt.ess
of the thi.JlLg which Kant has created. The essential delineation
of the thing is not an accidental by-product in the
philosophy of Kant; the detennination of the thingness of
the thing i.s its metaphysical center. By means of an interpretation
,of Kant's work we put ourselves on the path of
the inhere.ntly historical question concerning the thing.
Kant's philosophy shifts for the first time the whole of
modem thought and being (Dasein) into the clarity and
transparency of a foundation (BegrUndung). This deterrnines
every attitude toward knowledge since then, as well
as the bounds (Abgrenzungen) and appraisals of the sci-
55
56 WHAT IS A THING?
ences in the nineteenth century up to the present time.
Therein Kant towers so far above all who precede and
follow that even those who reject him or go beyond him
still remain entirely dependent upon him.
Moreover, in spite of all differences and the extent of
the historical interval, Kant has something in common
with the great Greek beginning, which at the same time
distinguishes him from all German thinkers before and
after him. This is the incorruptible clarity of his thinking
and speaking, which by no means excludes the questionable
and the unbalanced. and does not feign light where
there is darkness.
We turn our question "What is a thing?" into Kant's
and, vice versa, Kant's question into ours. The further
task of the lecture thus becomes very simple. We need not
report in broad surveys and general phrases 14about" the
philosophy of Kant. We put ourselves within it. Henceforth,
only Kant shall speak. What we conbibute, from
time to time, will inclicate the sense and the direction so
that, en route, we do not deviate from the path of the
question. The lecture is thus a kind of signpost. Signposts
are indifferent to what happens on the highway itself.
They emerge only here and there on the edge of the road
to point out and to disappear again in passing.l8
The way (Weg) of our question "What is a thing?" leads
to Kant•s major work, the Critique. of Pure. Reason, the
whole of which we cannot go through in this lecture. We
must once more limit the stretch of our way. But we shall
try to get to the middle of this stretch (Strecke) and thus
into the center of this major work in order to understand
it in its chief inner directions. If this succeeds, then we
,have not become acquainted with a book which a professor
once wrote in the eighteenth century, but we have
entered a few steps into a historical-intellectual basic posi·
tion which carries and determines us today.
ta This reference to signposts is not facetious. See SZ pp. 76-83,
for his enlightening analysis of "signs" (Zeichen). Trans.
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 51
1. The Recc~ption of Kant's Work in His Lifetime;
Neo-Kantianism
Kant once said in conversation during the last years of
his life: "I have come a century too soon with my writings.
After a hundred years, people will first correctly under·
stand me and th.en study my books anew and admit them!.,
(Vamhagen voJLl Ense, Tagebucher, 1,46.)
Does a vain s•elf-importance speak these words or even
the angry hopelessness ofbeing·shoved aside? Neither, for
both are foreiE~ to Kant•s character. What is thus expressed
is Kant's deep knowledge about the manner and
method by which philosophy realizes itself and takes
effect. Philosophy belongs to the most primordial of human
efforts. Of these, Kant once remarked: "Man's efforts
tum in a perpetual circle, and return to a point where they
have already once been; thus materials now lying in the
dust can perhaJlS be worked into a magnificent building"
(Kant's answer to Garve, Prolegomena, Karl Vorlander,
ed. [6th ed.; l.eipzig: 1926], p. 194 ). Here speaks the
superior calm elf a creator who knows that ••contemporary"
standards are dust and that what is great has its own
law of movement.
When Kant published the Critique of Pure Reason in
1781, be was fif1ty•seven, and, until the time of its publica ..
tion, he had been silent for more than ten years. During
the decade of this silence, 1770-81, Holderlin, Hegel, and
Beethoven lived through their boyhood. Six years after
the first appearance of the work, the second edition was
published. Isolated passages were worked over, some
proofs were sharpened. But the total character of the
wo1·k remained unchanged.
Contemporaries stood helpless before the work.It went
b~yond anything customary by the elevation of its question-
posing, by the rigor of its concept-fonnation, by the
far-seeing organization of its questioning, and by the
58 WHAT IS A THING?
novelty of the language and its decisive goal. Kant kneW
this; he realiZed that this work in its entire plan and
method was against the taste of the time. Kant himself
once described the ruling taste of his age as the effort ~
represent the diflicult in philosophical things as easy.1
"
Although not understood in its essential purposes, but always
apprehended only from an accidental exterior, the
work was provocative. An eager tug-of-war developed in
writings opposing and defending it. Up to the year of
Kant's death, 1804, the-number of these had reached two
thousand. It is this condition of the argumentation with
Kant· to which SChiller's famous verse entitled •'Kant and
His Interpreters" refers.
Wie doch ein eindger Reicher so 'Viele
Bettler in Nahrung
Sett.t! Wenn die Konige b<Utn, haben die
K"arrner zu tun.
(How a single rich man
so many beggars feeds!
When kings build, the
carters have work.)
I
'
This same Schiller first helped Goethe to a conception
of Kant's philosophy and to philosophy in general. Goethe
later said that reading one page in Kant affected him
"like stepping into a brightly lighted room."
During the last decade of Kant's life, 1794-1804, the
conception of his work and consequently the effect of his
philosophy took a certain direction. This happened
through the work of younger thinkers, Fichte, Schelling,
and Hegel. Their philosophy developed on the basis of
J<~ "Allein so glitig und bereitwillig Sie aucb in Ansehung dieses
meines Gesucbs sein mOehten, so bescbeide ich docb aeme,
dass, nach dem herrschenden Geschmacke dieses Zeitalters, das
Scbwere in speculativen Dingen als IeiCht vonustellen (nicht
Ieicht zu macben), lhre gefilligste Bermilbung in diesem Punkte
doch frucbtlos sein wiirde." Prolegomma, p. 193. Trans,
Kan.t's Manner of Asking About the Thing S9
Kant's {or, r;ather. by taking off from it) and formed itself
into what is c:ommonly known as "German Idealism." This
philosophy J,eaped over Kant with all due respect but did
not overcome him. This could not be done, if for no other
reason, beca1L1se his essential foundation was not attacked
but only abandoned. It was not even abandoned, because
it was never even taken: it was only skirted. Kant's work
remained lilte an unconquered for:tress behind a new
front, which,, in spite of (or perhaps because of) its vehemence,
was already thrust into emptiness a generation
later, i.e., it vvas not capable of generating a truly creative
opposition. It seemed as if in Gennan Idealism all philosophy
had reached an end and finally and exclusively had
entrusted the~ administration of knowledge to the sciences.
Around the 1middle of the nineteenth century, however,
there arose d1e call, "Back to Kant.''115 This return to Kant
sprang from a new historical intellectual situation; at the
same time it ·was determined by a renunciation of German
Idealism. This intellectual situation toward the middle of
the nineteenth century is essentially characterized by the
definite pred·ominance of a particular form of science; it
is desipated by the catchword "positiVism." This is
knowledge whose pretention to truth is &om beginning to
end based o1n what one calls "facts,. (Tatsachen); one
holds that th•ere ean be no argument about facts; they are
the highest court of appeal for the decisions concerning
truth and untruth. What is proved by experiments in the
natural sciences and what is verified by manuscripts and
documents it1 the historical-cultural sciences is ·true, and
is the only scilentifically verifiable truth.
The return to Kant was guided by the intention of finding
in Kant the philosophical foundation and justification
•
1
:. Otto Liebmann (1840-1912) closed each chapter of Kant un4
~~e _!=pigonen ( 1865) with his famous caD, "Also muss auf Ktnrt
PU~11ckgegange•1 werdenl" For reference. see. Z. Weber. History of
~~~osuplry, Fnlnk ThiUy, trans., with section "Philosophy since
46
" by Ralph Barton Perry (New York: Seribners, 1925), p.
I, n. 1. TratU~
60 WHAT IS A THING?
for the positivistic conception of science. But it was simultaneously
a conscious renunciation of ·Gennan Idealism, a
renunciation which understood itself as the renunciation
of metaphysics. This new tum toward Kant. therefore,
took his philosophy as the destruction of metaphysics.'
This return to Kant was called Neo--Kantianism, in contrast
to the disciples of Kant's lifetime, the former Kantians.
When from our present position we survey this return
to Kant, it must immediately become questionable
whether it could have regained, or could even find at all.
Kant's basic position, which German Idealism had also
simply skirted or leapt aver. That was and is indeed not
the case. Nevertheless, the philosophical movement of
N~Kantianism has its undeniable merits within the intellectual
history of the second half of the nineteenth century.
These are •hove all three:
( 1) Altbo\lgh one-sided, the renewal of Kant's philos·
ophy saved positivism from a complete slide into the deifi·
cation of facts. (2) Kant's philosophy itself was made familiar
in its entire range through careful interpretation
and elaboration of his writings. (3) The .general investigation
of the history of philosophy, especially ancient phUosophy,
was carried out on a higher plane of inquiry under
the guidance of Kant's philosophy.
All this is, of course, little enough when we measure it
by the standard of the intrinsic task of the· philosophy,
which, again, also does not mean much as long as it only
remains a counterclaim, instead of a counter achievement.
Meanwhile, we see Kant's philosophy in a wider visual
field than Neo-Kantianism did. KMt's historical position
within Western metaphysics has become clearer. But this
means, at first, only an improved historical recognition in
the usual sense and not the discussion with the basic position
he first captured. Here what he predicted must be
made to come true: .. People will study my books anew and
admit them.'' When we are so far, there is no more Kantianism.
For every mere ~'ism" is a misunderstanding and
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 61
the death of history. Kant's Critique· of Pure Reason is
among those philosophical works which, as long as there
is philosophy on this earth at all, daily become in~ustible
anew. 11t is one of those works that have alreidy pronounced
judgment over every future attempt to "overcome"
them by only passing them by.
2 .. The Title of Kant! a Major Work
We are att•empting here to put as learners our question
"What is a thing?" to Kant's work.
At first it i$ certainly completely obscure what a work
with the title Critique of Pure Reason has to do with our
question "What is a thing?" We shall only truly experience
how that is 'if we enter into the work, i.e., through the
subsequent il!lterpretation. However, in order not to leave
everything int complete darkness for too long we shall attempt
a preliminary elucidation (vordeu-tende Erliiuterung).
We attLcampt to gain a foothold at the center of this
work in orde:r to come into the movement of our question
at once. First, a preliminary explanation is to be given
concerning the extent to whiCh our question 'is intimately
connected with this work-regardless of whether we take
over Kant'sbasic position ornot,orhowfarwe do or don't
transform it. We give this enlightenment by way of elucidating
·the title. This is so arranged that we immediately
orient ourselves at the spot in Kant's work where our interpretation
elf it begins, without first knowing the preceding
parts of the work. Critique of Pure Reason-everyone
knows what '"critique" and "to criticize" mean; "reason''
and what a •••reasonable" man or a "reasonable" suggestion
is, are ~llso understood by everyone. 'What A'"pure"
signifies in distinction to impure (e.g., impure water) is
clear also. Yet we cannot think anything appropriate to
the title. Critique of Pure Reason. Above all, one would
expect a critique to reject something unsatisfactory, in·
sufficient, and negative; one would expect criticism of
62 WHAT IS· A T H l N G ?
something like an impure reason. Finally, it is quite incom·
prehensible what the Critique of Pure Reason can have to
do with the question concerning the thing. And yet we are
completely justified in asserting that this title expresses
nothing else but the question concerning the thing-but as
a question. The question is, as we know, historical. The
title means this history in a decisive era -of its movement.
The title means this question, and is a thoroughly his-
torical one. In an external sense this means that Kant, who
was thoroughly clear abOut his work, has given it a title
demanded by his age and, at the same time, led beyond it.
What history of the question concemh1g the thing is expressed
in this title?
3. The Categories as Modes of Assertion
We remind ourselves of the beginning of the essential
determ.iDation of the thing. This takes place along the Unes
of the assertion (Aussage ). As a proposition the simple assertion
is a saying in which something is asserted about
something, e.g., "The house is red.'' Here .,red'' is said of
(zu-gesagt) the house. That of which it is said, 1..,;o~edp.c110r~ is
what underlies. Therefore, in the attribution (Zu~sagen),
as it were, something is said from above down to what
underlies. In the Greek language ~ea....:. means '4from above
down to something below.'' To say means-~, the saying
is q,~,. The simple assertion is a Ka.T4~fll1&~, a Alyc&r~ n ICILT4
'I'&JIG9.
Much can be said down to a thing, about it (Auf ein
Ding kann verschiedenes heruntergesagt, iiber e8 ausgesagt
werden). "The bouse is red.'' "The house is high."
.,The house is smaller" (than that one· beside it). '4The
house is on the creek.'' "The house is an eighteenth-century
one.''
Guided by these different assertions, we can follow how
the thing itself is determined at any given time. Thereby
we do not now pay attention to this particular thing in the
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 63
example, the house, but to that which, in every such assertion
of this sort, characterizes every thing of this kind in
general, i.te., the thingness. "Red" says in a certain respect,
namely, in respect of color, how the thing is constituted.
Viewed in general, a trait or quality is attributed to
( zugesagt) the thing. In the attribution, "large" becomes
size, exten:sion. (quantity)t With the "smaller than," there
is asserted what the house is, iD relationship to another
(relation); "on the creek": the place; "eighteenth century":
the time.
Quality,, extension, relation,.place, and time are determinations
which are said in general of the thing. These de- ,
terminatic•ns name the respects in which things exhibit
themselve:s to us if we address them in the assertion and
talk about them, the perspectives from which we view
things, in which they show themselves. Insofar as these
determinations are always said down to the thing, the
thing in general is always already c~asserted (mitgesagt)
as the already present (als das schon Anwesende ). What is
said in pt1eral about each thing-as a thing, this "that is
spoken do,ND to the thing" wherein its thingness and generality
de1:ennine themselves, is called by the Greeks
tcuntyopltt. (~e~sTC&...lyopM&v). But what is thus attributed means
nothing other than the being characterized, being ex·
tended, being in relation to, being there, being now, of the
thing as so:mething that is. In the categories the most general
detemlinations of the being of something that is are
said. The thingness of the thing means the being of the
thing as sotnething that is.lfe cannot lay this state of facts
lao.. .o ften and too emphatically before our eyes-namely,
that those detennmafions wfncn consttmte tlie 5emg of
som~thtng that 15, t.e., of me diJng nseif, have received
their name assertions a u e g. name or
the determination o ing Seins es rmmu gen) is not
u_n arbitrary designation. In thus naming the determinatIons
of being modes of assertedness (Ailsgesagtheit) lies
a unique interpretation of being. That since then in West\
64 WHAT IS A THING?
em thinking the determinations of being are called "categories"
is the sharpest expression for what we have
already emphasized: that the structure of the thing is· connected
with the structure of the assertion. If in the past
and still today, the Scholastic teaching of the being of what
is, "ontology," sets as its proper goal to erect a utheory of
categories" (Kategoriertlehre),itis because therein speaks
the beginning interpretation.of the being of what is. i.e.,.
the thingness of the thing from out of the assertion.
4. AOyo.-RatiO-Reason
The assertion is a kind of Aiy"...-addressing something
as something. This implies something taken as something.
Considering and expressing something as something in
'
. Latin is called reor, ratio. Therefore, ratio becomes the
translation of .\dyo~. The simple asserting simultaneously
gives the basic form in which we mean and think something
about the things. The basic form of thinking. and
thus of thought, is the guideline for the determination of
tlie s o e g. e cate ories etemune in
general e emg o at 1s. To ask a ut e emg of
whal is, what and how what is, i!.' at all, counts as philosophys
principal task. To ask in this way is first, first-ranking,
and proper philosophy, ... p.m, •M.ouo.la., prima
philosophia.
It ,mmains essentjal that thought as simple assertion,
.\dyo~, ratio, is the sujdeline for the determmatjgp gf,tbe
bei'iigof what is, i.e., for the thingness of the thing. "Guide.
lble" (Leitfaden) here means that the modes of asserting
direct the view in the determining of presence (Anwesen.
he.it ), i.e., of the being of what is.
Aoyot and ratio are translated in German as reason
(Vernunft ). Herein there appears for us, as it were, for the
first time a connection between the question about the
thing on the one hand, and about "reason" (Critique of
Pure Reason) on the other. But therewith has not yet been
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 65
shown how the· process of Western metaphysics arrived at
a critique of pure reason and what this means. We shall
now attempt this in a few rough outlines-
5. The Modern Mathematical Science of Nature
and tJze ·Origin of a Critique of Pure Reason
We have see1n that, with the exception of the beginning
$mong the Greeks, the rise of modern natural science be- I
cam~ decisive for the essential definition of the thing. The
transfonnation of Dasein, which was busic to this event,
changed the ·c11aracter of modern thought and thus of
metaphysics and prepared .the necessity for a critique of
pure reason. It is. therefore, necessary for many reasons
that we acqu1re a more deliiied conception of the character
of modern natural science. In this we must forego entering
deeply into spe:cial questions. Here we cannot even pur ..
s1:1e the main pe!riods of its history. Most of the facts of its
hi~to are knc»wn and et our ow e innermost
olnnections of this banpening is still very
poor and dat • It is very clear onl that the transformation-
·of science Das1ca y too p ace ou centwies of
mSCJI§SlOD·860lll {fie tMaamenfil COncepts and principles
of thoupt, i.e., the b8S1c attitude toward things and _toward
what is a.t all. Such a discussion could be carried
'tlirougb only ";Jib complete mastery of the tradition of
medieval as wc~l as ancient science of nature. This d~
manded an unutsual breadth a.Ild certainty of conceptual
thought and fin.ally a mastery of the new experiences and
modes of procedure. All this presupposed a unique passion
for an authoritative knowledge, which finds its like only
among the Gnteks. a knowledge which first and constantly
questions its own presuppositions and thereby
seeks their basi!i. To hold out in this constant questioning
appears as the a•nly human way to preserve things in their
inexhaustibility, i.e., without distortion.
The transfonnation of science is accomplished always
66 WHAT IS A THING?
only through itself. But science itself thereby has a twofold
foundation: ( 1 ) work experiettces, i.e., the direction
and the mode Qf mastering and using what is; (2) metaphysics_,
i.e., the projection of the fundamental knowTedge
of being, out of which what is knowledgeably develops.
Work experiences and the projection of beffig are reciprocally
related to one another and always meet in a basic feature
of attitude and of h~anly beins there (J)asein ).
We·shall now try to clarify roughly this basic feature of
the modern attitude toward knowledge. But we do this
with the intention of understanding modem metaphysics
and (identical with that) the passibility and necessity of
something like Kant's Critique of Pure Reason.
a The Characteristics of Modern Science in Contrast
to Ancient and Medieval Science
I
One commonly characterizes modern science in contra ..
distinction to medieval science by saying that modem ·science
starts from facts while the medieval started &om gen ..
eral speculative propositions and concepts. This is true in
a certain respect. But it is equally undeniable that the
medieval and ancient sciences also observed the facts, and
that modem science also works with UDiversal propositions
and concepts. This went so far as to criticize Galileo,
one of the founders of modem science, with the same reproach
that he and his disciples actually made against
Scholastic science: They said it was "abstract/' i.e., it proceeded
with general propositions and principles. Yet in an
even more distinct and conscious way the same was the
case with Galileo. The contrast between the ancient and
the modern attitude toward science cannot. therefore, be
established by saying there concepts and principles and
here facts. Both ancient and modem science have to do
with both facts and concepts. However, the way the facts
are conceived and bow the concepts are established are
decisive.
~rcant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 61
!,!te_greatness and superioti,b' of nahtral science d.uring r
the sixteenili and seyenl£mth centuries is b~;ithe \
scientist:S'\Vere philosophers. The underst~;;
are no JT.lere facts but that a f · · · ·
liiJii""QjJ:he ndamental conception and alwa s d nds
upon ho,w concept1on reac es e c cteristic
of positi-ViSm, wherein we hive stood lor decades and today
morte than ever. is contrary to this in that it thinks it
can suftidently manage with facts or other and new facts,
while concepts are merely expedients which one somehow
needs but should not get too involved with, since that
would bt: philosophy. Furthermore, the comedy, or rather
the tragedy. of the present situation of science is, first, that
one thinlc:s to overcome positivism through positivism. Tg
be sure, this attitude only prevails where average and subsequent
work is done. Where genuine and discovering
research is done, the situation is no different from that of
three hwndred years ago. That age also had its indolence.
just as, conversely, the present leaders of atomic physics,
Niels Bc:)hr and Heisenberifl think in a thoroughly philo-
=-==~~!n£~tove~0tioldc:':Cm:rr=a:;Qq:
able.._
- Thus, if one tries to distinguish modern from medieval
science by calling it the science of facts, this remains basi·
cally inadequate. Further, the difference between the old
and the new science is often seen in that the latter experiments
and "experimentally'' proves its cognitions.
But the t:~perimeDt, the test. to get information concerning
the behavior of things through a definite ordering of
things and events was also already familiar in ancient
times and in the Middle Ages. This kind of eXperience lies
at the ba:sis of all technological contact with things in the
ca·afts and the use of tools. ljp"e 12e; it is not the exogri"!
lcn t as such in the wide sense of testing throufi observahon,
but ilie manner of settin u the test an the· · t
wit-h whi·ch it is un ertaken an in w "chit is grounde<L
68 WHAT IS A THING?
The manner of experimentation r!t£:aesuma~* connected
with the kind of conceptual dete tion of e facts and way of applying concepts, i.e., with the kind of hyPothesiS
about~s.
Besiealbese two constantly cited characteristics of
modem science, science of facts and experimental research,
one also usually meets a third. This third affirms
} that modern science is a calculating and measuring inves)
tigation. That is true. However, it is also true of ancient
scienceJ which also worked with measurement and n~
ber. Again it is a question of how and in what sense calculllting
·and measuring were applied and carried out, and
what importance they have for the determination of the
objects themselves.
• With these three characteristics of modem science, that
it is a factual, experimental, measuring science, we still
miss the fundamental characteristic of modem science.
The fundalnental feature must constsf m what rules aiid
determines the baste movement of saence Itself. IlUS
cbaractenstic ts e manner o wor m wt
e meta h sical the in ess of t e
tffings. How are we to conceive this fundamental eature ?"""'
We entitle this fUndamental feature of modem science
for which we are searching by sayin! that modem science
is mathematical. From Kaiit comes e oft-quoted but still
little understood sentence, ;'However, I maintain that in
any particular doctrine of nature only so mtit11 B!hUlne
science can be found as there is mathematics to be found
iD,.it""7
' (Preface to Metaphysical Beginning Principles of
Natural Science.)
The decisive question is: What do "mathematics" and
,.mathematical" mean here? It seems as though we can
only take the answer to this question from mathematics
itself. This is a · use mathematics itself's only
a. atical.
The fact that today mathematics in a practical and
pedagogical sense is included in the department of
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 69
natural science has its historical basis, but it is not essentially
nc~sary. Formerly, mathematics belonged to the
septem artes liberales. Mathematics is as little a natural
science .as philosophy is one of the humanities. Philosophy
in its es:sence belongs as little in the philosophical faculty
as matJb.ematics belongs to natural science. To house
philosophy and mathematics in this way today seems to be
a blemish or a mistake in the catalog of the universities.
But perlltaps it is something quite different (and there are
people who ~ even concerned about such things),
namely, a sign that there no longer is a fundamental and
clarified! unity .of the sciences and that this unity is no
longer either a necessity or a question.
b. The Mathematical, MJ.Ih,<ntt
How do we explain the mathematical if not by mathematics?
In such questions we do well to keep to the word
itself. Olf course, the facts are not always there where the
word occurs. But with the Greeks, from whom the word
stems, \\re may safely make this assumption. In its formation
the word "mathematical" stems from the Greek expressiblll
nl pra,/NJJIII.Tt&, which means what can be learned and
thus, at 1the same time,. what can be taughti p.ariJci.,eL" means
to leam1, ~ the teaclling, and this in a twofold sense.
First, it means studying and learning; then it means the
doctrine taught. To teach and to learn are here intended
in a wid~e and at the same time essential sense, and not in
the later narrow and trite sense of school and scholars.
Howeve1r, this is not sufficient to grasp the proper sense
of the ··n1athematical." To do this we must inquire in what
further c::onnection the Greeks employ the mathematical
and fro11n what they distinguish it.
We experience what the mathematical properly is when
we inquire under what the Greeks classify the mathematical
and against what they distinguish it within this
classification. The Greeks identify the mathematical, Tel
p.u.B;j/M&Ta., with the following determinations:
/
70 WHAT IS .A THING?
1. Ta. 4fuaucd: The things insofar as they originate and
come forth from themselves.
2. T~ wour4p.m~: The things insofar as they are produced
by the human hand and stand as such.
3. 'l'l Xfi'4/IATG: The things insofar as they are in use and
therefore stand at our constant disposal-they may
be either ~vaucJ., rocks and so on, or wo&Dt~, something
specially made.
4. Ta .,pl.yp~~.Ta: The things insofar as we have to do with
them at all, whether we work on them, use them,
transform them, or we only look at and examine
tbelll--trpL\p.cr.T•, with regard to ,.pa;e,~: here.,~ is
taken in a truly wide sense, neither in the narrow
meaning of practical use (XP~cu ), nor in the sense of
.,.~as moral action: .. ~ff is all doing, pursuing,
and enduring, which also includes wol.,w; finally:
5. TA """p.a..,.: According to the characterization running
through these four, we must also say here of
pti941UJn&: The things. insofar as they •.• but the question
is: In what respect?
In every case we realize that the mathematical concerns
.,. things, and in a defiDite respect. With the question concerning
the mathematical we move within our original
question "What is a thing?" In what respect are things
taken when they are viewed and spoken of mathematically?
We are long used to thinking of numbers when we think
of the mathematical. The mathematical and numbers are
obviously connected. Only the question remains: Is this
connection because the mathematical is numerical in character,
or .. on the contrary. is the numerical something
mathematical? The second is the case. But insofar as num'!'
bers are in a way connected with the mathematical there
still remains the question: Why precisely are the numbers
something mathematical? What is the mathematical itself
that something like numbers must be conceived as something
mathematical and are primarily brought forward as
Kant'J• Manner of Asking About the Thing 71
themathemati.cal? Md'rJcrt~ means learning; J1461Jp.a.,.a., what ls
learnable. In accord with what has been said, this de&lomi·
nation is inten1ded of things insofar as they are learnable.
Learning is a kind of grasping and appropriating. But not
every taking is a learning. We can take a thing, for instance,
a rock. take it with us and put it in a collection of rocks.
We can do the same with plants. It says in our cookbook
that one "takes," i.e., uses. To take means in some way to
take possession of a thing and have disposal over it. Now,
what kind of taking is learning? Mo"fp.c~Til-things, insofar
as we learn th•em. But strictly speaking, we cannot learn a
thing, e.g., a "teapon; we can learn only its use. Learning
is therefore a way of taking and appropriating in which
the use is a.ppropriated. Such appropriation occurs
through the using itself. We call it practicing. However,
practicing is agaln only a kind of learning. Not every
learning is a practicing. What is now the essential aspect
of learning in· the sense of ,46-rpw? Why is learning a taking?
What of the things is taken, and how is it taken?
Let us again consider practicing as a: kind of learning.
In practicing "Ne take the use of the weapon, i.e., we take
how to handle~ it into our possession. We master the· way
to handle the weapon. This means that our way of handling
the weapon is focused upon what the weapon itself
demands; "wc~pon" does not mean just this individual
rifle of a parti,cular serial number, but perhaps the mode]
''98." During the practice we not only learn to load the
rifle. handle t~he trigger and aim it, not only the manual
skill, but, at tllle same time, and only through all this, we
become familiar with the thing. Learnir~g_is always also
hl.-comin_g farniliar. Learning has different directions:
learning to use and learning to become familiar. Becoming
familiar aBso has diJferent levels. We become familiar
with a certain individual rifle, which is one of a certain
mode) and also a rifle in general. With practice, which is a
learning of its use, the becoming familiar involved in it remains
within a:.. certain Umit. Generally, the thing becomes
72 WHAT IS A THING?
known in general only in that the learner becomes a good
marksman. Bul there is '·'more'' to become familiar with
about the thing-the rifle-i.e., to learn in general, for ex ..
ample, ballistics, mechanics, and the chemical reaction of
certain materials. Furthermore, one can learn on it what a
weapon is, what this particular piece of equipment is. But
is there much else still to learn? There is: How does such
a thing work? ( Welche Bewandtnis es ..• hat.) But to use
the thing, to shoot it, we need not know that. Certainly
not. But this does not deny that how it works belongs to
the thing. When a thing we are practicing to use must be
produced, in order to provide h so that it can be at one's
dispQsal, the producer must have become familiar before ..
band with how the thing works (Bewandtnis). With respect
to the thing there is a still more basic familiarity,
whatever must be learned before, so that there can be
such models ~d their corresponding parts at all; this is a
familiarity with what belongs to a gun as such and what
a weapon is.
This must be known in advance, and must be learned.
and must be teachable. This becoming familiar is what
makes it possible to produce the thing; and the thing produced,
in tum, makes its practice and use possible. What
we Jearn by practice is only a limited part of what can be
learned of the thing. The original basic learning takes into
cognition what a thing is, what a weapon ·is, and what a
thing to be used is. But we already know that. We do not
first learn what a weapon is when we become familiar with
this rifle or with a certain model of riOe. We already know
that in advance and must know it; otherwise we could not
perceive the rifle as such at all. Because we know in advance
what a weapon is, and only in this way. does What
we-see laid out before us become visible as what it is.
Of course, we know what a weapon is only in general and
in an indefinite way~ When we come to know this in a
special and determined way, we come to know something
which we really already know. Precisely this "ta~ing ~~
Kant~s Manner of Asking About the Thing 73
n imnce .. is the~ genuine essence of learnfng, the p.J.IT}a'"'· The
p.a.f9114m are tllle things insofar as we take cognizance of
them as what. we already know them to be in advance,
the body as the bodily. the plant-like of the plant, the animal-
like of tbe animal, the thingness of the thing, and so
on. This genui~ne learning is therefore an extremely peculiar
taking, a taking where he who takes only takes what he
actually already has. Teaching corresponds to lhis learning.
Teaching is a giving, an offering; but what is offered
in teaching is not the learnable, for the student is merely
instructed to 1take for himself what he already has. If the
student only takes over something which is offered be
does not learn. He comes to learn only when be experiences
what he takes as some.thing be himself already has.
True learning Qn)y occurs where the taking of what one I
already has is a self-giv-ing and is experienced as such.
Teaching, therefore, does not mean any-thing else than to
Jet the others learn, i.e., to bring one another to learning.
Learning is m•ore difficult than teaching: for QD!y he who
can truly learn-and only as long as he can do it~
truly teach. The genuine teacher differs from the pupil
only in that he can learn better and that he more genuinely
wants to learn. In all teaching, the teacher learns the
most.
The most difficult learning is to come to know all the
way what we a1lready know. Such learning, with which we
are here solely concerned, demands sticking rather closely
to what appea1rs to be nearest at hand; for instance, to the
question of wbat a thing is. We steadfastly ask, considering
its usefulness. the same obviously useless question of
what a thing i!;, what tools are, what man is, what a work
of art is, what the state and what the world are.
There was, in ancient times, a famous Greek scholar
who traveled everywhere lecturing. Such people were
called Sophists. Once this famous Sophist, returning to
Athens from a lecture tour in Asia Minor, met Socrates on
the street. It ,;vas Socrates' habit to hang around on the
74 WHAT IS A THING?
street and to talk with people, With a cobbler. for instance,
over what a· shoe is. Socrates had no other topic than what
the things are. "Are you still standing there," condescendingly
asked the much traveled Sophist of Socrates, "and
still saying the same thing about the same thing?" "Yes,"
answered Socrates~ uthat I am. But you who are so extremely
smart, you never say the same thing about the
same thing!'
The ,.,.,.tnjp.a.Ta, the mathematical, is that "about" things
which we really already know. Therefore ·we do not first
get it out of things, but. ina certain way, we bring it already
with us. From this we can now understand why, for instance,
~r is something mathema,ical. We see three
chairs and say that there are three. What "three'• is the
three chairs do not tell us, nor three apples, three cats nor
any other three things. Moreover, we can count three
things only if we already know "three:• In thus grasping
the nu~r three as such, we only expressly recognize
something which, in some way, we already have. This re<>
ognition is genuine learning. The number is something in
the proper sense learnable, a ~l'f', i.e., something mathematical.
Things do not help us to grasp "three" as such,
i.e., threeness. "Three"-what exactly is it? It is the number
in the natural series of numbers that stands in third
place. In "third"? It is only the third number because it is
the three. And .. place"-where do places come from?
"Three" is not the third number, but the first number.
·~one" isn't really the first number. For instance, we have
before us one loaf of bread and one knife, this one and, in
addition. another one. When we take both together we say,
"both of these,•• the one and the other, but we do not say,
"these two," or l + 1. Only when we add a cup to the bread
and the knife do we say "all." Now we take them as a sum,
i.e., as a whole and so and so many. Only when we perceive
it from the third is the former one the first. the former
other the second. so that one and two arise, and 41and" becomes
"plus," and there arises the possibility of places and
Ka,•t's Manner of Asking About the Thing 15
of a series. What we now take cognizance of is not created
from any of' the things. We take what we ourselves somehow
alread:y have. What must be understood as mathematical
is vvbat we can learn in this way.
We take cognizance of all this and learn it without regard
for th(~ things. Numbers are the most familiar form
of the mathematical because, in our usual dealing with
things, wht:n we calculate or count, numbers are the
closest to that wh~ch we recognize in things without creating
it from theoi. For this reason numbers are the most
familiar form of the mathematical. .In this way, this most
familiar mathematical becomes mathematics. But the
essence of ·the mathematical does not lie in number as
purely delbniting the pure ,.how much," but vice versa.
Because nwmber has such a nature, therefore, it belongs
to the learruable in the sense of~-
Our expression "the mathematical" always has two
meanings. It means, first, what can be learned in the manner
we have: indicated, and only in that way, and, second.
the manner of learning and the process itself. The mathematical
is that evident aspect of things within which we
are always already moving and according to which we
experience them as things at all, and as such things. The
mathem.atic:al is this fundamental position we take toward
things by w.hich we take up things as already given to us,
and as they should be given. Therefore, the mathematical
is the fundamental presupposition of the knowledge of
things.
Therefore, Plato put over the entrance to his Academy )
the words: •Aycwp.l.,pvrav ",Mw dcri.,..,! "Let no one who has
not grasped the mathematical enter here! " 10 These words
do not mean that one must be educated in only one subject-"
geonletry"-but that he must grasp that the fundamental
condition for the proper possibility of knowing is
1
" ~lias Phlilosophus, sixth century A.D. Neoplatonist, in Ariswtelts
Categ.orias Commentaria (Commentaria in Aristotelem
Gracca), A. B'usse. ed. (BerUn, 1900), l 18.18. Trtlns.
76 WIIAT IS A THING?
the knowledge of the fundamental presuppositions of all
knowledge arid the position we take based on such knowledge.
A knowledge which does not build its foundation
knowledgeably) and thereby takes its limits. is not knowledge
but mere opinion. The mathematical, in the .original
sense of learning what one already knows, is the fundamental
presupposition of "academic" work. This saying
over the Academy thus contains nothing mare than a hard
condition and a clear circumscription of work. Both have
had the consequence that we today, after two thousand
years, are still not through with this academic work a.nd
never will be so as long as we take ourselves seriously.
This short reflection on the essence of the mathematical
was brought about by our maintaining that the basic character
of modem science is the mathematical. After what
has been said, this cannot mean that this science employs
mathe~tics. We posed our question so that, in consequeJtce
of this basic ·character of science, mathematics in
the narrower sense first bad to come into play.
Therefore, we must now show in what sense the foundation
of modern thought and knowledge isessentiallymathematical.
With this intention we shall try to .set forth an
essential step of modern science in its main outline. This
will make clear what the mathematical consists of and
how it thus unfolds its essence, but also becomes established
in a certain direction.
c. The Mathematical Character of Modern Natural
Science; N<..'"Wton's First Law of Motion
Modern thought does not appear aJI at once. Its beginnings
stir during the later Scholasticism of the fifteenth
century; the sixteenth century brings sudden advances as
well as setbacks; but it is only during the seventeenth
century that the decisive clarifications and foundations
ar~ accomplished. This entire happening finds its first
systematic and creative culmination in the English matheK.
ant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 77
tnatician and physicist. Newton,. in his major work,
Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, 1686-87.
In the titl1e, "philosophy" indicates general science (compare
"PhUosophia experimentalis"); "principia" indicates
first principles, the beginning ones, i.e., the very first
principles. But these starting principles by no means deal
with an in.troduction for begitmers.
This work was not only a .culmination of preeeding
efforts, but at the same time the foundation for the succeeding
na~tural science. It bas both promoted and limited
the develo·pment of natural science. When we talk about
classical physics today, we mean the form of knowledge,
questioning, and evidence as Newton established it. When ,
Kant spe2ilks of "science," be· means Newton's physics.
Five yearsi aher the publication of the Critique of Pure
Reason, ~mctly one hundred years after Newton's. Principia,
Kant published an essay entitled The Metaphysical
Principles of Natural Science (1786). On the basis of the
position r·eacbed in the Critique of Pure Reason it is a
conscious supplement and counterpart to Newton ·s work.
At theconc:lusion of the preface to his piece Kant expressly
refers to Newton·s work. The last decade of Kantts creativity
was devoted to this sphere of inquiry.
As we ~~lance at Newton's work (we cannot do more
here), we 1thereby also preview Kant's concept of science,
and we Ic,ok at fundamental conceptions still valid in
physics today, although no longer exclusively so.
This work is preceded by a short section entitled "Definiliones:•
These are definitions of quantitas materiae,
quantitas 1notus, force, and, above all, vis centripeta. Then
there follows an additional scholium which contains the
series of faLttlous conceptions of absolute and relative time,
absolute and relative space, and finally of absolute and
l't.•lative m&otion. Then follows a section with the title
"AxiotnatG~, sive leges mot us"' (41Principles or Laws of Motion").
Thlis contains the proper content of the work. It is
divided into three volumes.. The first two deal with the
78 WHATIS ATHING?
motion of bodies. de motu corporum, the third with the
system of the world, de mundi systemate.
Here we shall merely take a look at the first principle,
i.e., that Law of Motion which Newton sets at the apex of
his work. It reads: "Corpus omne preservare in statu suo
quiescendi vel movendi uniformiter in directum, nisi
quatenus a viribus impressis cogitur statum ilium
mutare." "Every body continues in its state of rest, or uniform
motion in a straight line, unless it is compelled to
change that state by force impressed upon it ... 17 This is
called the principle of inertia (lex inertiae).
The second edition of this work was published in 1713,
while Newton was still alive. It included an extended preface
by Cotes, then professor at Cambridge. In it Cotes
says about-this basic principle: "Natura lex est ab omnibus
recepta philosophis." ("It is a law of nature universally
received ·by all philosophers.")
Students of physics do not puzzle over this law taday
and have not for a long time. If we mention it at all and
know anything about it; that and to what extent it is a
fundamental principle, we consider it self~dent. And
yet, one hundred years before Newton, at the apex of his
physics, put this law in this form, it was still unknown. It
was not even Newton himself who discovered it, but
Galileo; the latter, however, applied it only in his last
works and did not even express it as such. Only the Genoese
Professor Baliani articulated this discovered Jaw in
general terms. Descartes then took it into his Principia
Philosophiae and tried to ground it metaphysically. With
Leibniz it plays the role of a metaphysical law (C. I.
Gerhardt, Die philosophischen Schriften von G. W.
Leibniz [Berlin, 1875-1890], IV, 518).
This law, however, was not at all self-evident even in the
n Isaac Newton. Mathematical Principles of No.tural Philoso·
phy and His System of the World, Andrew Motte, trans., 1729;
revised. translation, Florian Cajori (Berkeley: University of Cali·
fornia Press, 1946), p. 13. Trans.
Ktznt's Manner of Asking About the Thing 19
seventeenth century. During the preceding fifteen hundred
years it w;u not only unknown, but Nature and Being in
general WE~re experienced in such a way that it would have
been senst~ess. In its discovery and its establishment as
the fundatnentallaw lay a revolution that belongs to the
gre.atest in human thought, and which first provides the
ground foJr the turning from the Ptolemaic to the Coper·
nican conc::eption of the universe. To be sure, tbe 1laW of
inertia and its definition already had their predecessors in
ancient times. Certain fundamental principles of Democ·
ritus (460--370 s.c.) tend in this direction. It has also been
shown that Galileo and his age (partly directly and partly
indirectly )1 knew of the thought of Democritus. But, as is
always th~~ case. that which can already be found in the
older philosophers is seen only when one has newly
thought it out for himself. Kant spoke very clearly about
this fundalnental fact in the history of thought when, after
the publication of his main work, some contemporari~
reproached him for saying only what Leibniz had "al·
ready" said. In-order to oppose Kant in this way Profes:sor
Eberhardt of Halle, a disciple of the Wolft-Leibniz school,
founded a special journal, the Philosophische Magazin.
The criticism of Kant was so superficial and. at the same
time, so a.rrogant that it found considerable response
among or~linary people. When this activity went too far,
Kant decided to take up the "disgtisting" work of a J»
Jemie with the title: On a Discovery, According to Which
All New Cl"'itiqu~ of Pure Reason Is Made Dispensable by
ttn Older O'ne. The essay begins as follows:
"Herr Etberhardt has made the discovery that Leibnizian
philosophy also contains a critique of reason just
as the rece.nt one, which, in addition, futroduces a dogma-
1 ism based upon an exact analysis of the possibility of
knowledge, which contains all the truth of the latter, but
even beyon.d that contains a well-grounded enlargement-of
the sphere of the understanding. How it could happen that
people had not long ago seen these things in that great
80 WHAT IS· A THING?
man's philosophy and its daughter, the Wolftian philosophy,
is not explained by him. But how many discoveries,
taken as new, are now seen by some clever interpreters
very clearly in ancient ones after it had been indicated to
them what to look for! "1
•
This also was the case during the age of Galileo. After
the new inquiries were made, people co\lld then again read
Dem®ritus. After people understood Democritus with the
help of Galileo they could reproach the latter for not really
reporting anything new •. AU great insights and discoveries
are not only usually thought by several people at the same
time, they must also be r~thought in that unique effort
to truly say the same thing. about the same thing.
d. The Difference Between the Greek Experience of
Nature and That of Modem Times
d,. The experience of na.ture in Aristotle and Newton
How does the aforementioned fundamental law relate
to the earlier conception of nature? The idea of the universe
(world) which reigned in the West up to the seventeenth
century Wi\S detennined by Platonic and Aristotelian
philosophy. Scientific conceptional thought was
e$pecially guided by those fundamental representations,
concepts and principles which Aristotle· had set forth in
his lectures on physics and the heavens (De Caelo), and
which were taken over by the medieval Scholastics.
We must, therefore, briefly go into the fundamental conceptions
of Aristotle in order to evaluate the significance
of the revolution articulated in Newton's First Law. But
we must first liberate ourselves from a prejudice which
was partly nourished by modem science's sharp criticism
11 "Uber eine Entdeckung. nach der aile neue Kritik der reinen
Vernunft durch eine altere entbehrlich gemGcht Werden sollj"
Kant, Gesdmmslte Schriften (Berlin and Leipzig: Preussi$Che
Akademie der Wissenschaften,l923), VIII,187. Trans.
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Tlting 8.1
of Aristotle: that his propositionsweremerelyconcepts he
thought up, which lacked any support in the things themselves.
This might be true of later medieval Scholasticism,
which often, in a purely dialectical way, was concerned
with a foundationless analysis of concepts. It is certainly
not true of Aristotle himself. Moreover, Aristotle fo\lght
in his time precisely to make thought, inquiry, and assertion
always; a Al:yav ApnAnyot~p.at~ To&4l f/HI.ll'OI't"o"'· ·(De Caelo 7,
306 a, 6.) (11'To say that which corresponds to what shows
itself on wbat is.") 10
In the sarne place, Aristotle expressly says: TlAD~ Be T~ ,..0.
WO&'I"'~ ~cfrO"r-41''1" Tb lpyov, rij4l 31 +•.,.c«Jfi T«\ f/lawo,....vov d.tlKVplfi)CI
~ee&T& rlJv alrilrpw. (Ibid., 7,306 a, 16-17.) ("And that issue,
which in the~ case of productive knowledge is the product.
in the knowledge of nature is the unimpeachable evidence
of the senses as to each fact." ).20
We have beard (p. 70 f.) that the Greeks characterize the
things as 4/nHrucJ. and w(IUJvpou, such as occurs from out df
itself, or such as is produ~~er-ge:t, gemac;:!J
omesponding to tliis re two erent 1a
ledJie c.,~,). knowledge of what occurs from
out of itselt: and knowledge of what is produced. Con-e...
sponding to, this the TlAIIv of knowledge,j.e., that whereby
this knowledge comes to an end, where it stops. what it
really depends on, is different. Therefore, the above principle
states, "That at which productive knowledge comes to
a halt, wheJrein, from the beginning it halts or takes its
footing, is the work to be produced. That, however, in
which the knowledge of 'nature' taKes its footliOld is 1N\·
4»a'.,.)~"vo .. , wllat shows ItselF on diit whr occurs ou o 1 -
~e!.f. This is always predominant, ffie standarct espec.a
for perception, i.e .• for the mere •taking-in-and-up'., (in
cuntradistin.ction to making and concerning oneself busily
~~· Tran~latlion of Heidegger's renditioiL Trans.
Ju Unless catherwise stated, all following references to the
\\'odrks of Aristotle are to The Works of Aristotle, W. D. Ross, ed.
atn ta·ans., II vol. (Oxford: Clnrendon Press, 1931). Trans.
82 WHAT IS A THING?
with creating on the things) (im Unterschied tum Machen
und Sich·zu-schaffen-machen an den Dingen). What Aristotle
here expresses as a basic principle of scientific
method differs in no way from the principles of modern
science. Newton writes (Principia Liber III, Regulae W):
''In philosophia experimentale propositiones ex phaenomenis
per inductionem collectae non obstantibus
contrariis hypothesibus pro veris aut accurate aut quamproxime
haberi debent, donee alia occurrerint phaenomena,
per quae aut accuratiores reddedantur aut exceptionib\
ls abnoXiae.•• ("In experimental philosophy we are
to look upon propositions inferred by general induction
from phenomena as accurate or very nearly tnte, notwithstanding
contrary hypotheses that may be imagined, till
such times as -other phenomena occur, by which they may
either be made more accurate, or liable to exceptions.")
But despite this similar basic attitude toward .P~
l»re, the basic position of Aristotle is essentially different
rom that of Newton. For what is actually apprehended as
appearing and how it is interpreted are not the same.
d2• The doctrine of motion in Aristotle
Nevertheless there is beforehand 1he common experience
that what is, in the general sense of Nature--earth.
sky, and stars-is in motion or at rest. ~~1 Jn~:qs_gmy !.
special ~~ ~f_:!l19~!~ It is everywhere a question of the
motion of bodies. But how motion and bodies are to be
conceived and what relation they have to each other is
not established and not self-evident. From the general and
indefinite experience that things change, come into existence
and pass away, thus are in motion, it is a long way to.
an insight into the essence of motion and into the manner
of its b(donging to things. The ancient Greek conception of
the earth is of a disc around which floats Okeanos. The
sky overarcbes it and turns around it. Latet Plato, ArisKant's
J14anner of Asking About the Thing 83
tode, and Eudoxus-though each differently-present the
earth as a ball'but still as a center of everything.
We restrict <J•urselves to the presentation of the Aristodelian
conception which later became widely dominant,
and this only sufficiently to show the contrast which expresses
itself in the first axiom.of Newton.
First, we ask .. in general, what, according to Aristotle,
is the essence of a thing in nature? The answer is: TA ifwtlucG.
fl',:,p.A<rti.areiUIII o.Vr~ ·~ ~ee~n\ .,.0..0,. C'Those bodies which belong
to 'nature' and constitute it are, in themselves, movable
with res}M~t to location.") Motion, tn general, is
IA-f~IM:rj, the altc::ration of something into something else.
Motion in this ~wide sense is, f"'r instance, turning pale
and blushing. But it is also an alteration when a body is
transferred frorn one place to another. This being. transported
is expres:sed in Greek as .,,.. kl"JG'&c nn\ .. .Wor means
in Greek wlult constitutes the proper motion of Newton ...
ian bodies. In this motion there lies a definite relation to
the place. Tbe .naotion of bodies, bqwever, is ~ea8 dVrci. according
to thema, themselves. That is to say, how a body;
moves, i.e., how it relates to the place and to what it relates-
all thiS has its basis in the body itself. Basis
(Grund) is ClpXJi and has a double meaning: that from
which sbmething emptges, and that which governs over
what emerges k1 this way. The body is &px7l '"~~-What
an d.p.x' ~e&,jmw~ illl this manner is, is _,k,,, the primordial
mode of emergE~nce ( H ervorgehens }, which however remains
limited only to pure movement in space. Hetein
there appears an essential transformation of the concept
of physics. The body moves according to its nature. A
moving body, which is itself an&,~.,.,;.,(~, is a natural
body. The purc~ty eanby body moves downward, the
purely fiery body-as every blazing flame demonstrates
-moves upward. Why? Because the earthy has its place
below, the fiery, above. Each 'body has its place according
tn irs kind. and it strives toward that place. Around the
84 WHAT IS A THING?
earth is water, around this, the air, and around this, fire
-the four elements. When a body moves in its place, this
motion accords with nature, "a""- •1~""'· A rock falls down
to the earth .. However, if a rock is thrown upward by a
sling, this motion is essentially against the nature of the
rock, wap& ~,faw. All motions against nature are #lt~, violence.
The kind of motion and the place of the body are determined
according to its nature. The earth is in the center
for all characterization and evaluation of motion. The rock
which falls moves toward this center, brl To ,laol'. The fire
which rises, lln Toii ,.luot~, moves away from the center. In
both cases the motion is •'"'~"',. rMeia, in a straight line. But
the stars and the entire heavens move around the center,
ftpl...O ,W,or. This motion is .V•A¥· Circular motion and motion
in a straight line are the simple movements, d:rrAa.l. Of
these two, circular motion is Rtst. that is, the hi-best, and
thus, of the highest order. For wpo.rcpor T;, TiM&Ov nv d.T~,
the complete precedes.the incomplete. Their plac;:e belongs
to the motion of bodies: .In circular motion the body has its
place in the motion itself, wherefore this motion is perpetual.
and really existent. ln rectilinear motion the place
lies only in a direction and away from another place, so
that motion comes to an end there. Besides these two
forms of simple motion, there are mixtures of both, p.urnj.
The purest motion, in the sense of change of place, is circular
motion; it contains, as it were, its place in itself. A body
which so moves itself, moves itself completely. This is true
of all celestial bodies. Compared to this, earthy motion is
always in a straight line, or mixed, or forced, but :Pways
incomplete.
There is an essential difference .between the motion of
celestial bodies and earthly bodies. The domains of these
motions are different. How a body moves depends upon its
species and the place to which it belongs. The where determines
the how of its being, for being is called presen.ce
(Anwesenheit). The moon does not fall earthward, beKar.
tt's Manner of Asking About the Thing 85
cause it mo·ves in a circle, that is, it moves completely,
permanently in the simplest motion. This circular motion
is in itself cc:>mpletely independent of anything outside it·
self-for instance, from the earth as center. But, in contrast,
to anticipate, in modem thought circular motion is
understood c:mly so that a perpetual attracting force (Zug)
from the center is necessary for its formation and preservation.
With Aristotle, however, this "force," 8vi'CIJ&'~. the
capacity for its motion, lies in the nature of the body itself.
The kind of 1motion of the body and its relation to its place
depend upoll the nature of the body. The velocity of nat·
ural motion increases the nearer the body comes to its
place, that is, increase and decrease of velocity and the
ceasing of aLotion d~pend upon the nature of the body. A
motion con1rary to nature, i.e., a forced motiQn, has its
cause in the force that affects lt. However, according to its
motion, the body, driven forcibly, must withdraw frotp
this power, lm.d since the body itself does not bring with ft.
any basis for this forced motion, its motion must necessarily
becom~e slower and finally stop: ....ane~ yap ToiJ {jctl(,op.fvov
1r0ppwnp411 y~yt.Op.aa. fJpaB~npov ~lput&& (Dyl ollpcavov A8 , 277 b, 6.
,.dxUJTa ~.,o,IGIG.,.a .. 4p4 .~.ibid., A:!, 269 b, 9). This corresponds
distinctly to the common conception: a motion im·
parted to a body continues for a certain time and then
ceases, passlng over into a state of rest. Therefore, we
must look for the causes for the continuation or endurance
of the motion. According to Aristotle, the basis for
natural motilon lies in the nature of the body itself, in its
essence, in its most proper being (seinem eigensten Sein ).
A later Sche:>lastic proposition is in accord with this:
Operari (ag~~re) sequitur esse. "The kind of motion follows
from the kind of being."
da, Newton's doctrine of motion '
How does Aristotle's descriptive observation of nature
and concept of motion relate to the modem one, which
86 WHAT IS A THING?
got an essential foundation in the first axiom of Newton?
We shall tty to present in order a few main distinctions.
For this purpose we give the axiom an abridged fonn:
Every body left to itself moves uniformly in a straight line.
("Corpus omne, quod a viribus impressis non cogitur,
uniformiter in directum movetur.") We shall discuss
what is new in eight points:
1. Newton's axiom begins with dcorpus omne," "every
body." That means that the distinction between earthly
and celestial bodies has 'become obsolete. The universe is
no longer divided into two well-separated realms~ .the one
beneath the stars, the other the realm of the stars themselves.
All natural bodies are essentially of the same kind.
The upper realm is not a superior one.
2. lit accord with this, the priority of circular motion
over motion in a straight line also disappears. And,
even insofar as now, in reverse, motion in a straight line
becomes decisive, still this does not lead to a division of
bodies and of different domains according to their kind of
motion.
3. Accordingly, the distinguishing of certain places also
disappears. Each body can fundamentally be·in any place.
The concept of place itself is changed: place no longer is
where the body belongs according to its nature, but only
a position in relation to other positions. (Compare points
5 and 7 ). •op4 and change of place in the modem sense are
not the same.
With respect to the causation and determination of motion,
one does not ask for the cause of the continuity of motion
and, therefore, for jts perpetual occurrence, but the
reverse: being in motion (Bewegtheit) is presupposed.
and one asks for the causes of a change from motion presupposed
as uniform, and in a straight line. The circularity
of the moon's motion does not cause its uniform perpetual
motion around the earth. Precisely the reverse. It is this
motion for whose cause we must search. According to the
law of inertia, the body of the moon should move from
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 87
every point of its circular orbit in a straight line, i.e., in
the form of a tangent. Since the moon does not do so, the
questilon based upon the presupposition of the law of
inertia and out of it arises: Why does the moon decline
from the line of a tangent? Why does it move, as the
Greeks put it, in a circle? The circular movement is now
not csLuse but, on the contrary, precisely what requires
a reas.on. (We know that Newton arrived at a new answer
vvhen he proposed that the force according to which
bodie~; fall to the ground is also the one according to
which the celestial bodies remain in their orbits: gravity.
Nf~n compared the .centripetal declination of the
moon from the tangent of its orbit during a fraction of
time '.vith this linear distance which a falling body
achieve~ at the surface of earth in an equal time. At this
point '"e see immediately the elimination of the distinction
ahready mentioned between. earthly and celestial motions
a:od thus between bodies.)
4. M:otions themselves are not determined according to
different natures, capacities, and forces, the elements of
the body, but, in reverse, the essen~ of force is determined
by the fundamental law of motion: Every body,
left to ]itself, moves. uniformly in a straight line. According
to this, a force is that whose impact results in a declination
from rectilinear, uniform motion. "Vis impressa
est actic> in corpus exercita, ad mutandum eius statum vel
quiesce1ndi vel movendi uniformiter in directum" (Principia.
Def. IV).:n This new determination of force leads at
the same time to a new determination of mass.
5. Co·rresponding to the change of the concept of place,
motion is only seen as a change of position and relative
position., as distances between places. Therefore, the detcrmina
tion of motion develops into one regarding distances,
Sitretches of the measurable, of the so and so large.
:n "An impressed force is an action exerted upon a body. in
o_rder to c:hange its state, either of rest. or of uniform mc,>tio~
nght line." Trans.
88 WHAT IS A THING?
Motion is determined as the amount of motio~. and, similarly,
mass as weight.
6. Therefore, the difference between natural . and
against nature, i.e., forced, is also eliminated; the {Jla.,. violence,
is as force only a measure of the change of motion
and is no longer special in kind. The impact,. for instance,
is only a particular fonn of the vis impressa, along with
pressure and centripetaUty.
7 .. Therefore, the concept of nature in general changes.
Nature is no longer the· inner principle out of which the
motion of the body follows; rather. nature is the mode of
the variety of the changing relative positions of bodies, the
manner in which they are present in space and time, which
themselves are domains of possible positional orders and
determinations of order and have no special traits anyl"'
where.
8. Thereby the manner of questioning nature also
changes and. in a certain respect, becomes opposite.
We cannot set forth here the full implications of the
revolution ·of inquiry into nature. It should have become
clear only that, and how, the application of the first law
of motion implies all the essential changes. All these
changes are linked together and uniformly based on the
new basic position expressed in the first law and which we
call mathematical.
e. The Essence of the Mathematical Project
(Entwurf )11
( Galileo's Experiment with Free Fall)
For· us, for the moment, the question concerns the application
of the First Law, more precisely, the question in
what sense the mathematical becomes decisive in it.
22 Perhaps the best insight as to what Heidegger means by
"project" is Kant's use of the word in the Critique of Pure
R~on. "When Galileo experimented with balls whose weight he
himself bad already predetermined, when TorricelU caused the
K'ant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 89
How ahout tbis law? It speaks of a body, corpus quod a
viribus im·pressis non cogitur, a body which is left to itself.
Where do we find it? There is no such body. There is also
no experiment which could ever bring such a body to
direct perception. But modem science, in contrast to the
mere dialc::ctical poetic conception of medieval Scholasticism
and science, is supposed to be based upon experience. -·
Instead, it has such a law at its a~. This law speaks of a
thing that does not exist. It demands a fundamental representation
of things which contradict the ordinary.
The ma:thematical is based on such a claim, i.e~, the application
·c>f a determination of the thing, which is not ex·
perientialJiy created out of the thing and yet lies at the
base of ev·ery determination of the things, making them
possible aJDd making room for them. Such a fundamental
conceptioJl of·things is neither arbitrary nor self-evident.
Therefore,, it required a long controversy to bring it into
air to carry a weight which he had calculated beforehand to be
equal to tmat of a definite column of wat~r. or_ at a later time,
when Stahl converted metal into lime and this again into metal
by wi~Ning something and then adding It, a light broke in
em all investigators of nature. They learned that reason only gains
insight into what it proc:luc:es itself according to its own projects
(was sie selbst nach ihrem Entwuyte hervorbringt); that it must
go before with principles of judgment aceording to constant
laws, and ccmtrain nattire to reply to its questions, not content to
merely follow her Jeading-strings1
' (B XIII).
Literally Bntwur/ means "a throwing forth"; from werfen (to
throw) and ent- (incUcating separation or severing in the sense
of .,out:• "away/' "from," "forth"). In present day use it is a
sketch, and the word 4'sketch" is sometimes used in this translation,
as well as 11project" and "projection." Originally a .textile
term referring to the building of a frame, in the seventeenth cen ..
tury it (ent\•~erfen) took the sense of a preliminary or preparatory
sketch. As flleidegger uses it in SZ~ 145, it is a sketehing which is a
t~rowing foJrth of Dasein in which it "throws before itself the pos~•
bility as possibility and as such allows it to be." lt is through
~n~crstand.ing as project that the structure of the being of en~
t!t•cs, including DtJSein. becomes accessible. Project is construelive
in that Ut allows the possibilities of entities to be; in the case
~fpa.fein to' achieve its openness to its own being (St!e KM, pp.
4.1V7-]0). Trmu.
90 WHAT IS A THING?
power. It required a change in the mode of approach to
things along with the achievement of a new manner of
thought. We can accurately follow the history of this battle.
Let us cite one example from it. In the Aristotelian
view, bodies move according to their nature, the heavy
ones downward, the light ones upward. When both fall,
heavy ones fall faster than light ones, since the latter have
the urge to move upward. It becomes a decisive insight of
Galileo that all bodies fall equally fast. and that the differences
in the time of fall only derive from the resistance of
the air, not from the different inner natures of the bodies
Qr from their own corresponding relation to their particular
place. Galileo did his experiment at the leaning tower
in the town of Pisa, where he was professor of mathematics,
in order to prove his statement. In it bodies of different
weights did not arrive at precisely the same time
after having fallen from the tower, but the difference in
time was slight. In spite of these differences and therefore
really against the evidence of experience, Galileo upheld
his proposition. The witnesses to this experiment, however,
became really perplexed by the experiment and Galilea's
upholding his view. They persisted the more obstinately
in their former view. By reason of this experiment
the opposition toward Galileo increased to such an· extent
that he had to give up his professorship and leave Pisa.
Both Galileo and his opponents saw the same ·"fact."
But they interpreted the same fact differently and made
the same happening visible to themselves in different
ways. Indeed, what appeared for them as the essential fact
and truth was something different. Both thought something
along with the same appearance but they thought
something different, not only about the single case, but
fundamentally, regarding the essence of a body arid the
nature of its motion. What Galileo thought in advance
about motion was the determination that the motion of
every body is uniform and rectilinear, when every obstacle
is excluded •. but that it also changes unifonnly
lCant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 91
when an equal force affects it. In his Discorsi, which appeared
ilt11638, Galileo said: "Mobile super planum hori·
zontale projectum mente concipio omni secluso impedimenta,
jam constat ex his~ quae fusius alibi dicta sunt,
Ulius mo,tum aequabilem et perpetuum super ipso plano
futurum esse, si planum in infiuitum extendatur." (,.I
think of a body thrown on a horizontal plane and every
obstacle excluded. This results in what has been given a
detailed account in another place, that the motion of the
body ove:r this. plane would be uniform and perpetual if
this plae«~ were extended infinitely.")
In this. proposition, which may be considered the antecedent
oJf the First Law of Newton, what we have been
looking for is clearly expressed. Galileo says: ''Mobile
mente concipio omili secluso impedimento." (.,I think in
my mind of something moveable that is entirely left to itself.'')
this "to think in the mind'' ( Sich·im-Geiste-denken)
is that giving..oneself-a.cognition (Sich ... selbst-eine-Kenntnis
geber.r) about a determination of things. It is a procedure
of going ahead in advance, which Plato once
characterized regarding ~~ in the following . way: ·".,a.M/3* a.'"'" ll e~irraii n, .. munfp.'JI' (Meno 85d), ''bringing up
and takintg up- above and beyond the other-taking the
knowleds;e itself from out of himself.")
There iis a prior grasping together in this mente condpere
of ,what should be uniformly determinative of each
body as such, i.e., for being bodily. All bodies are alike. No
motion is. special. Every place is like every other, each
moment like any other. Every force becomes determinable
only by the change of motion which it causes-this change
in motion being understood as a change of place. All determinati•
Jns of bodies have one basic blueprint (Grundriss),
accc>rding to which the natural process is nothing
hut the sp,ace-time determination of the motion of points
of mass. This fundamental design of nature at the same
time circumscribes its realm as everywhere uniform.
Now if ,we summarize at a glance all that has been said,
92 WHAT IS A THING?
we can grasp the essence of the mathematical more
sharply. Up to now we said only its general characteristic,
'
that it is a taking cognizance of something, what it takes
being s.omething it gives to itself from itself, thereby giving
to itself what it already has. We now summarize the
fuller essential determination of the mathematical in a
few separate points:
1. The mathematical is, as mente concipere:, a project
(Bntwurf) of thingness (Dingheit) which, as it were, skips
over the things. The project first opens a domain (.Spiel~
raum) where things-i.e., facts-show themselves.
2. In this projection there is posited that which things
are taken as, what and how they are to be ·evaluated
(wurdigt) beforehand. Such evaluation (Wiirdigen). and
taking-for (Dafiirhalten) is called in Greek U&&.. The anticipating
determinations and assertions in the project are
£E.,:.pa1'Cl. Newton therefore entitles the section in which he
presents the fundamental determinations about things as
moved: Axiomata, sive leges motus. ~he p~~~t is axio_
matic. Insofar as every .science and cognition is expressed
in propositions, the cognition which is taken and posited
in the mathematical project is of such a kind as to set
things upon their foundation in advance. The axioms are
fundamental propositions.
3. As axiomatic, the mathematical project is the anticipation
(Vorausgriff) of the essence of things, of bodies;
thus the basic blyeprint CGrundris~) of the structure of
every thing and its relation to every other thing is sketched
in advance.
4. This basic plan ( Gn.~ndriss) at the same time provides
the measure for laying out of the realm. which, fu the
future, will encompass all thiilgs of that sort. Now nature
is no longer an inner capacity of a body, determining its
form of mo·tion and place. Nature is now the realm of the
uniform spac&time context of motion, which is outlined
in the axiomatic project and in which alone bodies can be
bodies as a part of it and anchored in it.
ltrant' s Manner of Asking About the Thing 93
5. Tlilis realm of nature, axiomatically determined in
outline by this project, now also requires for the bodies
and corpuscles within it a mode of access (Zugangsart)
appropriate to the axiomatically predetermined objects.
The mocLe of questioning and the cognitive determination
of nature: are now no longer ruled by traditional opinions
and concc....,ts. Bodies have no concealed qualities, powers.
and capa.cities. Natural bodies are now only what they
show themselves as, within this projected realm. Things
now sho\111 themselves only in the relations of places and
time poil1ts and in the measures of mass and working
forces. H:ow they show themselves is prefigured in the
project. 'lrherefore, the project also determines the mode
of taking in and studying of what shows itself, experience,
the expetiri. However, because inquiry is now predetermined
by the· outline of the project, a line of questioning
can be iw;tituted in such a way that it poses conditions in
advance to which nature mw..-st answer in one way or another.
Upon the basis of the mathematical, the experientia
becomes the modem experiment. Modem science is experimental
because of the mathematical project. The
experittie:nting urge to the facts is a necessary conse·
quence o:f the preceding mathematical skipping (.Vberspringen)
of all facts. But where this skipping ceases or
becomes weak, mere facts as such are collected, and
positivisn11 arises.
6. Because the project establishes a uniformity of all
bodies ace:ording to relations of space, time, and motion,
it also mukes possible and requires a universal uniform
·measure ~Ls an essential determinant ofthings, i.e., numerical
meas:urement. The mathematical project of Newtonian
bodies leads to the development of a certain "mathematics"
in the narrow sense. The new form of modem
science did not arise because mathematics became an essential
determinant. Rather, that mathematics, and a par·
ticular kind of mathematics, could come into play and had
come intCJ play is a consequence of the mathematical
94 WHAT IS A THING?
project. The founding of analytical geometry by Descartes,
the founding of the infinitesimal calculus by Newton, the
simultaneous founding of the differential calculus by Leibniz-
a.ll these novelties, this mathematical in a narrower
sense, first became possible and, above all, necessary, on
the grounds of the basically mathematical character of
the thinking.
We would certainly fall into great error if we were to
think that with this characterization of the reversal from
ancient to modem natw'al science and with this sharpened
essential outline of the mathematical we had already
gained a picture of the actual science itself.
What we have been able to cite is only the fundamental
outline along which there unfolds. the entire richness of
posing questions and experi.nlents, establishing of laws
and disclosing of new districts of what is. Within this
fundamental mathematical position the questions about
the nature of space and time, motion and force, body and
matter remain open. These questions now receive a new
sharpness.; for instance, the question whether motion is
sufficiently formulated by the designation "change of location."
Regarding the concept of force, the question arises
whether it is sufficient to represent force only as a cause
that is effective only from the outside. Concerning the
basic law of motion, the law of inertia, the question arises
whether this law is not to be subordinated under a more
general one, i.e., the law of the conservation of energy
which is now determined in accordance with its expenditure
and consumption, as work-a name for new basic
representations which now enter into the study of nature
and betray a notable accord with economics, with the
"calculation" of success. All this develops within and ac-
• cording to the fundamental mathematical position. What
remains questionable in all this is a closer determination
of the relation of the mathematical in the sense of mathe·
matics to the intuitive direct perceptual experience (zur
anschaulichen Erfahrung) of the given things and to these
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 95
things themselves .. Up to this hour such questions have
been open. Their questionabUity is concealed by the r&
suits and th•e progress of scientific work. One of these
burning ques;tions concerns the justification and limits of
mathematical formalism in contrast to the demand for an
immediate rc::turn to intuitively21 given nature (anschaulich
gegebenE~ Natur).
If we have: grasped some of what has been said up till
now, then it is understandable that the question cannot
be decided by way of an either/or, either formalism or
immediate ir1tuitive determination of things; for the nature
and direction of the mathematical project participate
in deciding their possible relation to the intuitively experienced
and vic:e versa. Behind this question concerning the
relation of mathematical formalism to the intuition of nature
stands tlhe fundamental question of the justification
and limits of the mathematical in general, within a fundamental
positi.on we take toward what is, as a whole. But,
in this regard the delineation of the mathematical has
gained an importance for us.
f. The M(~taphysical Meaning of the Mathematical
To reach our goal. the understanding of the mathematical
as we have gained it up to now is not sufficient. To be
sure, we shalll now no longer conceive of it as a generalization
of the pnx:edure of a particular mathematical discipline,
but rather the particular discipline as a particular
form develop,ing from the mathematical. But this math~
matical must, in turn, be grasped from causes that lie even
deeper. We have said that it is a fundamental trait of modern
thought. EVety sortof4wght, however, is always
only the execution and consequence of the historical mode
.:.!:~ Anschauer.r: "looking at." The usual English translation, "intuatiu,
n," comes from the Latin in and tuepr ("to see," ••took.''
.. gaxc,.). Intuition refers to immediate perception in contrast to
conceptuaJ inte~rence. Trans.
96 WHAT lS A THING?
of being (Dasein) at that time, of the fundamental posi·
tion taken toward what is and toward the way in which
what is, is manifest as such, i.e., to the truth.
What we have exhibited as the mathematical must now
receive a clarification in this direction; for only in this
way will what we are looking for become visible: precisely
that formation of modem metaphysical thought in whose
train something like the Critique of Pure Reason could
and had to arise.
f1• The principles: new freedom, self-binding and
self-grounding
We inquire, therefore, about the ~etaphysical meaning
of the mathematical in order to evaluate its importance
for modem metaphysics. We divide the question into two
subordinate ones: (1) What new fundamental position of
Dasein shows itself in this rise of the dominance of the
mathematical? (2) How does the mathematical, accord ..
ing to its own inner direction, drive toward an ascent to a
metaphysical determination of Dasein?
The second question is the more important for us. We
shall answer the first one only in the merest outline.
Up to the distinct emergence of the mathematical as a
fundamental characteristic of thought, the authoritative
truth was considered that of Church and faith. The means
for the proper knowledge of what is were obtained by way
of the interpretation of the sources of revelation, the writ
and the tradition of the Church. Whatever more experience
and knowledge had been won adjusted itself (as if by itself)
to this frame. For basically there was no worldly
knowledge. The so-called natural knowledge not based
upon any revelation, therefore, did not have its own fonn
of intelligibility or grounds for itself, let alone from out of
itself. Thus, what is decisive £or the history of science is
not that all truth of natural knowledge was measured by
the supernatural. Rather it is that this natural knowledge,
Ka:nt's Manner of Asking About the Thing 97
disregardit1g this criterion. arrived at no independent
foundation and character out of itself. For the taking over
of the Aris1totelian syllogism cannot be reckoned as such.
In the essence of the mathematical, as the project we
delineated, lies a specific will to a new formation and selfgrounding
of the form of knowledge as such. The detachment
from revelation as the first source for truth and the
rejection otr tradition as the authoritative means of knowledge-
all these rejections are only negative consequences
of the mathematical project. He ·who dared to project the
mathemati•:al project put himself as the projector of this
project upon a base which is first projected only in the
project. There is not only a liberation in the mathematical
project, but also a new experience and formation of freedom
itself, i.e .• a binding with obligations which are· selfimposed.
In the mathematical project develops an obligation
to principles demanded by the mathematical itself.
According to this inner drive, a liberation to a new freedom,
the mathematical strives out of itself to establish its
own essenc1e as the ground of itself and thus of aU knowledge.
Therewith we come to the second question: How does
the matheaaatical, according to its own inner drive, move
toward an ascent to a metaphysical determination of
Dclsein? We· can abridge this question as follows: In what
way does modem metaphysics arise out of the spirit of the
mathematic:al? It is already obvious from the form of the
question tbtat mathematics could not become the stan·
dard of philosophy, as if mathematical methods were
only approJ?riately generalized and then transferred to
philosophy.
Rather. ntodern natural science, Qlodem mathematics,
and modern metaphysics sprang from the same root of the
mathematical in the wider sense. Because metaphysics, of
these three. reaches farthest-to what is, in totality-and
because at the same time it also reaches deepest toward
the being of what is as such, therefore it is precisely meta98
WHAT IS A THING?
physics which must dig down to the bedrock of its mathematical
base and ground.
As we pursue how modern philosophy grows up from
this ground that it has laid in itself we grasp the historical
possibility and necessity of a "critique of pure reason."
Moreover, we shall come to understand why this work has
the form it has and why we shall begin our interpretation
of this ·work at that place at which we shall enter it.
f2. Descarte$: CogitQ Sum; ul1' as a special subject
Modem philosophy is usually considered to have begun
with Descartes (1596-1650), who lived a generation after
Galilee. Contrary to the attempts, which appear from time
to time. to have modern philosophy begin with Meister
Bckhart or in the time between Eckhart and Descartes, we
must adhere to the usual beginning. The only question is
how one understands Descartes' philosophy. It is no acci·
dent that the philosophical formation of the mathematical
foundation of modern DaseiH is primarily achieved in
France. England, and Holland anymore than it is accidental
that Leibniz received his decisive inspiration from
there, especially during his sojourn in Paris from 1672-76.
Only because he passed through that world and truly appraised
its greatness in greater reflection was he in a position
to lay the first foundation for its overcomiug.
The following is the usual image of Descartes and his
philosophy: During the Middle Ages philosophy stood-if
it stood independently at all-under the exclusive domination
of theology and gradually degenerated into a mere
analysis of concepts and elucidations of traditional opin·
ions and propositions. It petrified into an academic knowledge
which no longer concerned man and was unable to
illuminate reality as a whole. Then Descartes appeared
~d liberated philosophy from this disgraceful position.
He began by doubting everything. but this doubt finally
did run into something which could no longer be doubted,
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 99
for, inasmuch ilS the skeptic doubts, he ca.nnot doubt that
he, the skeptic, is present and must be present in order to
doubt at all. As I doubt I must admit that "I am." The "I,"
accordingly, is the indubitable. As the doubter, Descartes
forced men intcl doubt in this way; he led them to think of
themselves, of ltheir "1." Thus the "I," human subjectivity,
came to be declared the center of thought. From here
originated the !-viewpoint of modem times and its subjectivism.
Philc•sophy itself, however, was thus brought to
.the insight tha1t doubting must stand at the beginning of
philosophy: rei~ection upon knowledge itself and its possibility.
A theory of knowledge had to be erected before a
theory of the '\NOrld. From then on epistemology is the
foundation of philosophy, and that distinguishes modem
from medieval philosophy. Since then, the attempts to
renew Scholasticism also strive to demonstrate the epistemology
in their system, or to add it where it is missing, in
order to make it usable for modem times. Accordingly,
Plato and Aristcltle are reinterpreted as epistemologists.
This story of Descartes, who came and doubted and so
became a subjectivist, thus grounding epistemology, does
give the usual picture; but at best it is only a bad novel,
and anything but a story in which the movement of being
becomes visible::.
The main wclrk of Descartes carries the title Meditationes
de pri~mr philosophia (1641 ). Prima philosophiathis
is the .,,.:.17J f/Jr.Aouof/~Co. of Aristotle, the question concerning
the being ,of what is, in the form of the question
concerning the thingness of things. Meditationes de metaphysica-
nothing about theory of knowledge. The sentence
or proposition constitutes the guide for the question
about the being of what is (for the categories). (The essential
historical-nletaphysical basis for the priority of certainty,
which 61:-st made the acceptance and metaphysical
development of the mathematical possible-Christianity
and the certainty of salvation, the security of the individual
as such-will not be considered here.)
100 WHAT IS A THING?
In the Middle Ages, the doctrine of Aristotle was taken
over in a very special way. In later Scholasticism, through
the Spanish philosophical schools, especially through the
Jesuit, Suarez, the "medieval'' Aristotle went through an
extended interpretation. Descartes received his first and
fundamental philosophical education from the Jesuits at
La Flecbe. The title of his main work expresses both his
argument with this tradition and his will to take up anew
the question about the being of what is, the thingness of
the thing, "substance."
But all this happened in the midst of a period in which,
for a century, mathematics had already been emerging
more and more as the foundation of thought and was
pressing toward clarity. It was a timewhicb,in accordance
with this free projection of the world, embarked on a new
assault upon reality. There is nothing of scepticism here,
nothing of the !-viewpoint and subjectivity-but just the
contrary. Therefore, it is the passion of the new thought
and inquiry to bring to clarification and display in its in·
nermost essence the at first dark. unclear, and often misinterpreted
fundamental position, which has. progressed
only by fits and starts. But this means that the mathematical
wills to ground itself in the sense of its own inner
requirements. It expressly intends to explicate itself as the
standard of all thought and to establish the rules which
thereby arise. Descartes substantially participates in this
work of reflection upon the fundamental meaning of the
mathematical. Because this reflection concerned the
totality of what is and the knowledge of it, this bad to
become a reflection on metaphysics. This simultaneous
advance in the direction of a foundation of mathematics
and of a reflection on metaphysics above all characteriz~
his fundamental philosophical position. We can pursue
this clearly in an unfinished early work which did not appear
in print until fifty years after Descartes' death ( 1701 ).
This work is called Regulae ad directionem· ingenii.
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 101
( 1) Regula.e: basic and guiding propositions in which
mathematics submits itself to its own essence; (2) ad directionem
inJJenii: laying the foundation of the mathematical
in order that it, as a whole, becomes the measure
of the inquiriing mind. In the enunciation of something
subject to rules as well as with regard to the inner free
determination of the mind, the basic mathematical-metaphysical
character is already expressed in the title. Here,
by way of a reflection upon the essence of mathematics,
Descartes grasps the idea of a scientia universalis, to
which everything must be directed and ordered as the one
authoritative !;clence. Descartes expressly emphasizes that
it is not a question of mathematica vulgaris but of mathematica
univer-salis.
We cannot, here, present the inner construction and the
main content of this unfinished work. In it the modem
concept of sc:ience is coined. ·Only one who has really
thought through this relentlessly sober volume long
enough, down: to its remotest and coldest comer, Mfills
the p~uisite for getting an inkling· of what is going on
in modem science. In order to convey a notion of the intention
and attitude of this work, we shall quote only three
of thetwenty-e>nerules,namely, the third, fourth, and fifth.
Out of these the basic character of modem thought leaps
before our eyE~s.
Regula III: "Circa objecta proposita, non quid alii
senserint, vel quid ipsi suspicemur, sed quid clare et evi·
denter possim.us intueri, vel certo deducere, quaerendum
est; non aliter enim scientia acquiritur ." ("Concerning the
objects befon~ us, we should pursue the questions_, not
what others ru:lve thought, nor what we ourselves conjecture,
but what we can clearly and insightfully intuit, or
deduce with steps of certainty, for in no other way is
knowledge anived at.~· )24
:H Descartes, Rules for the Direction of the Mi11d, F. P. Lafleur,
ca·ans. (LibcJ'D.l Arts Press, 1961), p. 8. Trans.
102 WHAT IS A THING?
Regula IV: ~~Necessaria est methodus ad rerum veritatem
investigandam." ("Method is necessary for discovering
the truth of nature.'')
This nale does not intend the platitude that a science
must also have its method, but it wants to say that the
procedure, i.e., how in general we are to pursue things
('"foBot ), decides in advance what truth we shall seek out
in the things.
Method is not one pi~·of equipment of science among
others but the primary component out of which is first determined
what can become object and how it becomes au
object.
Regula V: "Tota methodus consistit in ordine et dispositione
eorum ad quae mentis acies est convertenda, ut
aliquam veritatem inveniamus. Atquae bane exacte ser ..
vabimus; si propositiones involutas et obscuras ad simpliciores
gradatim reducamus, et deinde ex omnium simplicissimarum
intuitu ad aliarum omnium cognitionem per
eosdem gradus ascendere tentemus." .("Method consists
entirely in the order and arrangement of that upon which
the sharp vision of the mind must be directed in order to
discover some truth. But, we will follow such a method
only if we lead complex and obscure propositions back
step by step to the simpler ones and then try to ascend by
the same steps from the insight of the very simplest propositions
to the knowledge of all the others.")
What remains decisive is how this reftection on the
mathematical affects the argument with traditional metaphysics
(prima philosophia), and how, starting from
there, the further destiny and form of modem philosophy
is determined.
To the essence of the mathematical as a projection J»
longs the axiomatical, the beginning of basic principles
upon which everything further is based in insightful order.
If mathematics, in the sense of a mathesis universalis, is to
ground and form the whole of knowledge, then it requires
the formulation of special axioms.
Kaa12t's Manner of Asking About the Thing 103
( 1) They must be absolutely first, intuitively evident in
and of thennselves, i.e., absolutely certain. This certainty
participate:; in deciding their truth. (2) The highest
axioms, as Jmathematical, must establish in advance, concerning
the whole of what is, what is in being and what
being means, from where and how the thingness of things
is determined. According to tradition this happens along
guidelines ()f the proposition. But up till now, the proposition
had been taken only as what ·offered itseH, as it were,
of itself. The simple proposition about the simply present
things cont,ains and retains what the things are. Like the
things, the proposition, too, is present-at-hand ( vorhanden
): it is the present ( vorhanden) container of being.
However, there can be no pre-given things for .a basically
mathe1matical position. The proposition cannot be an
arbitrary ODle. The proposition, and precisely it, must itself
be based on its foundation~ It must be a basic principlethe
basic principle absolutely. One must therefore find
such a prln,:iple of all positing, i.e., a proposition in which
that about which it says something, the subjectum
( h-o•dl"vo• ),. is not just taken from somewhere else. That!
underlying ;subject must as such first emerge for itseH in
this original proposition and be established. Only in this
way is the l:ubjectum. a fundamentum absolutumt purely
posited frofn the proposition as such,.a basis and, as such,
a fundamen tum absolutum at the same time inconcusstlm,
and thus in•:lubitable and absolutely certain. Because the
mathematical now sets itself up as the principle of all
knowledge, all knowledge up. to now must necessarily be
put into question, regardless of whether it is tenable or
not.
Descartes does not doubt because he is a skeptic; rather,
he must be<:ome a doubter because he posits the mathematical
as the absolute ground and seeks for all knowledge
a foundation that will be in accord with it. It is a question
not only of finding a fundamental law for the realm of
nature, but finding the very first and highest basic prin104
WHAT tS A THING?
ciple for the being of what is, in general. This absolutely
mathematical principle cannot have anything in front of it
and cannat allow what might be given to it beforehand. If
anything is given at all, it is only the proposition in general
as such, i.e., the positing. the position, in the sense of a
thinking that asserts. The positing, the proposition, only
bas itself as that which can be posited. Only where thinking
thinks itselft is it absolutely mathematical, i.e., a taking
cognizance of that which we already have. Insofar as
thinking and positing directs itself toward itself, it finds
the following: whatever and in whatever sense anything
may be .asserted, this asserting and thinking is always an
"I think.'' Thinking is always an "1 think," ego cogito.
Therein lies: I am, sum. Cogito, sum-this is the highest
certainty lying immediately in the proposition as such. In
"I posit" the "t' as the positer is co- and pre.posited as
that which is already present, as what is. The being of
what is is determined out of the "I am" as the certainty of
the positing.
The formula which the proposition sometimes has,
"Cogito ergo sum:' .suggests the misunderstanding that it
is here a question of inference. That is not the case and
cannot be so, because this conclusion would have to have
as its major premise: Id q11od cogitat, est; and the minor
premise: cogito; conclusion: ergo sum. However, the
major premise would only be a formal generalization of
what lies in the proposition: "cogito-sum." Descartes
himself emphasizes that no inference is present. The sum
is not a consequence of the thinkingt but vice versa: it is
the ground of thinking, the fundamentum. In the essence
of positing lies the proposition: I posit. That is a proposition
which does not depend upon something given beforehand,
but only gives to itself what lies within it. In it lies:
"I posit": I am the one who posits and thinks. This proposition
has the peculiarity of fu-st positing that about which
it makes an assertion, the sub jectum. What it posits in this
case .is the "1." The I is the subjectum of the very first prin·
Katl't's Manner of Asking About the Thi"g lOS
ciple, The I is, therefore, a special something which underlies
(Zttgr,undeliegendes }--l'"~tdp.&nv, subjectum-the
subjectum of the positing as such. Hence it came about
that ever since then the "r' has especially been called the
subjectum, ,.subject." The character of the ego as what is
especially already present before one remains unnoticed.
Instead the subjectivity of the subject is determined by
the '~1-ness" (Ichheit) of the "I think;" That the "I" comes
to be defined[ as that which is already present for representation
(the '•'objective,. in today's sense) is not because of
any 1-viewpc)int or any subjectivistic doubt, but because
of the essen1tial predominance and the definitely directed
radicalizatio•n of the mathematical and the axiomatic.
This ''1," which has been raised to be the special subjeclum
on the basis of the mathematical, is. in its meaning,
nothing "subjective" at all, in the sense of an incidental
quality of just this particular human being. This .. subject"
designated in the "I think/' this I, i$ subjectivistic only
when its essence is no longer understood. i.e., is not un ..
rolded from its origin considered in terms of its mode of
being (seins1miissigen Herkunft).
Until Desc~artes every t.hiilg presenWit·hand for itself
was a "subject"; but now the "I" becomes the special subject,
that wi.th regard to which all the remaining things
first determine themselves as such. Because-mathematically-
they fir$t receive their thingness only through the
founding relation to the highest principle and its '1subjcct"
(I), th~:y are essentially such as stand as something
else in relatitl•n to the "subject," which lie over against it as
objectum. The things themselves become "objects/'
The word objectum now passes through a corresponding
change oi; meaning. For up to then the word objectum
denoted what was thrown up opposite one's mere imagin·
ing: I imagine a golden mountain. This thus represented
-an objectum in the language of the Middle Ages-is, according
to the usage of language today, merely something
~~subjective"; for "a golden mountain" does no.t exist "ob106
W ft AT I S A T H I N G ?
jectively., in the meaning of the changed linguistic use.
This reversal of the meanings of the words sub jectum and
objectum is no mere affair of usage; it is a radical change
of Dasein, i.e., the illumination (Liclrtung ):1" of the being
of what is on the basis of t.he predominance of the mathematical.
II is a str~tch of the way of actual history necessarily
hidden from the naked eye, a history which always
cancems the openness of being-or nothing at all.
f:s. Reason as the highest ground: the principle of the I,
the principle of contradiction ·
The I, as "I think,'' is the ground upon which, hereafter.
all certainty and truth becomes· based. But thought, assertion,
logos, is, at the same time, the guideline for the determination
of being, the categories. These are found by the
guideline of the "I think," in viewing the "I." By virtue of
this fundamental significance for the foundation of all
knowledge, the ••r• thus becomes the accentuated and
essential definition of man. Up to that time and later, man
had been apprehended as the animal rationale. as a rational
living being. With this peculiar emphasis on the I,
i.e., with the "I think," the determination of the rational
and of reason now takes on a distinct priority. For thinking
is the fundamental act of reason. With the "cogitosum,"
reason now becomes explicitly posited according to
its own demand as the first ground of all knowledge and
the guideline of the determination of the things.
Already in Aristotle, the assertion, the A~"· was the
guideline for the determination of the categories, i.e., the
being of what is. However, the locus of this guidelioehum.
an reason, reason in general-was not characterized
211 "To say Das~in is 'illuminated" means that it is illumined in
itself as being·in-the-world but not through any other c:ntity, so
that it is itself the illumination ( Liclllung). What is present-athand
bidden in the dark becomes accessible only for an entity
iUI,IJIJinated in this way.'" (SZ, p. 133.) Trans.
K.~ant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 107
as the subojectivity of the subject. But now reason has been
expressly set forth as the "I think" in the highest principle
as guideline and court of appeal for all determinations
of being. The highest principle is the "I" principle:
cogito-s1um. Jt is the fundamental axiom of all knowledge;
but it is not the only fundamental axiom. simply for
this one reason. that in this !-principle itself there is included
and posited with this yet another one, and therefore
with every proposition. When we say "cogito-sum,"
we expres.s what lies in the subjectum (ego). If the assertion
is to he an assertion, it must always posit what lies in
the sub jec~tum. What is posited and spoken in the predicate
may not and cannot speak against the subject. The
•a.Tfl+um t:nust always be such that it avoids the tlvrl~aVi,
i.e., sayin,g in the sense of speaking against (Dagegensprechen)
·, of-contradiction. In the proposition as proposition,
a11d accordingly in the highest principle as
1-principlc~, there is co-posited equally basically as valid
the principle of the avoidance of contradiction (briefly:
the principle of contradiction).
Since tlte mathematical as the axiomatic project posits
itself as the authoritative principle of knowledge, the
posifu:lg Ui thereby established as the thinking, as the "I
think," th•~ !-principle. "I think" signifies that I avoid contradiction
and follow the principle of contradiction.
The J .. principle and the principle of contradiction spring
from the raature of thinking itself, and in such a way that
one looks 4:>nly to the essence of the "I think" and what lies
in it and iJ11 it alone. The "I think" is reason, is its fundamental
ac.t, what is drawn solely from the .,1 think,'' is
gained solely out of reason itself. Reason so comprehended
is Jpurely itself, pure reason.
These pjrinciples, which in accord with the fundamental
mathematical feature of thinking spring solely from reason,
beco1me the principles of knowledge proper, i.e.,
philosophy in the primary sense, metaphysics. The principles
of rraere reason are the axioms of pure reason. Pure
LOS WHAT IS 1\ 'THING?
reason, Aoyo~ so understood, the proposition in this form,
becomes the guideline and standard of metaphysicsJ i.e.,
the court of appeal for the determination of the being of
what is, the thingness of things. The question about the
thing is now anchored in .pure reason, i.e., in the mathematical
unfolding of its principles.
In the title, ''pure reason,'' lies the Aoyo~ of Aristotle, and
in the "pure" a certaia special formation of the mathe.
rna tical.
6· The History of the Question About tire Thing: St1111mary
The first chapter of the history of the question of the
thing is characterized by the mutualre.lation of the thing
and ~ion (Adyoor), the guideline along which the uni ..
versa) determinations of being (categories) are won. The
second chapter conceives the assertion, the proposition, in
a _mathematiQI_wu,_,.,LPr:Uj~!,p!~ and accordinglysets
forth the principles which lie in the essence of thinking, of
the proposition, as such, i.e., the 1-principl~ and the pr~ciple
Of contradi_~!l~l!· With Leibniz there is added the
principle of sufficient reason (Satz vom Grund), which is
also already co-posited in the essence of a proposition as a
principle. These propositions originate purely out of mere
reason, without the help of a relation to something previously
given before one. They are a pure self-giving of
that which thinking in its essence already has in itself.
It now remains to characterize the .third chapter in the
history of the question of the thing. i.e., to show how a
critique of pure reason could and had to develop from this
determination of things out of pure reason. For this p1.1rpose
it is necessary that we acquire, although only rQughly,
an idea of how modern metaphysics developed according
to the mathematical foundation from Descartes.
The philosophical fundamental axioms, i.e., the absolute
axioms, are the 1-principle, the principle of contradiction,
and the principle of sufficient reason. The whole of
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 109
metaphysics is to be based on them so that these axioms
also dominate throughout the inner structure of meta·
physics~~ i.e., the cognitive formation of its entire domain.
Up to n•ow this has hardly been mentioned. We have only
said tha1t metaphysics is the question concerning what is.
as the v~bole and of the being of what is. But how do we
mean this. what is as a whole? In the description of the
tum frc•m the earlier knowledge about nature to modem
thought, we limited ourselves. to a part of what is. Not
only th2lt, we also did not report how this limited district
(nature) belongs into the whole of what is. However, since
the .asc.endancy of Christianity in the West, not only
through.out the medieval period but also through all of
modem philosophy, nature and universe were- considered
as creat•ed .. Modem metaphysics from Descartes ·to Kant.
and also the metaphysics of German Idealism after Kant,
are unthinkable without the Christian ideas that underlie
them. Yet the relation to the dogma of the Church can be
very loose, even broken. According to the predominance of
the Christian concept of what is, a certain hierarchy and
arrangeJment enters into what is, as a whole. What is most
real and highest is the creative source of all that is, the one
persona.l God as spirit and creator. All of what is that is
not godJ!ike is the created. But among all that is created,
one is distinctive. This is man, and it is because his eternal
salvation is in question. God as the creator, the world as
the created, man and his eternal salvation; these are the
thr·ec do•mains defined by Christian thought within what
is, as a vvhole. Since metaphysics asks about what is, as a
\Vhole, what it is, why it is as it is, metaphysics proper, in
a Christ'ian sense, is concerned with God (theology), the
world ((:osmology), and man and his salvation (psychology).
But, in accord with the fundamental mathematical
characte:r of modern thought, metaphysics, too, is formed
out of tbe principles of pure reason, the ratio. Thus, the
mctaph)'Sical doctrine of God becomes a theology, but a
theologi.2 rationalis. the doctrine of the world becomes a
110 WHAT IS A THING?
cosmology, but a cosmologia rationalis, and the doctrine
of man, psychology, but a psychologia rational is.
1 t is natural to aJTange the whole state of modetn metaphysics
in the following way. For this form of metaphysics
two concepts are essential: ( 1 ) the Christian conception
of entities as ens creatum and (2) the basic mathematical
character. The first instance concerns the content of metaphysics,
the second its form. However, this characterization
according to content and fonn is entirely too facile to
be true, For this structure as determined by Christianity
forms not only the content of what is treated in thought,
but also·determines the form, the how. Insofar as God as
creator is the cause and the ground of all that is, the how,
the way of asking, is oriented in advance toward this
principle. Vice versa, the mathematiw is not only a form
clamped on over the Christian content, but it itself belongs.
to the content. Insofar as the l·principle, the "I
think," becomes the leading principle, the "I" and, conS&
quently, man, reach a unique position within this questioning
about what is. It designates not only one domain
BIJlong others, but just that one to which all metaphysical
propositions are traced back and from which they stem.
Metaphysical thought moves in the variously defined domain
of subjectivity. Later Kant therefore says: All questions
of metaphysics, i.e., those of the designated disciplines,
can be traced back to the question: What is man?
In the priority of this question there is concealed the
priority of method coined jn Descartes' Regulae.
If we use the distinction of form and content to characterize
modem metaphysics, then we must say that the
mathematical belongs just as much to the content of this
metaphysics as the Christian belongs to its form.
According to the three fundamental directions of metaphysical
questioning it deals each time with what is: God,
world, man. The essence and the possibility of this what is
must be determined in each case rationally, out of pure
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing Ill
reason, i.e., from concepts gained in pw-e thought. But if
what is and how it is must be decided in thinking and
purely from thought, then before the definitions of what
is as God, world, and man, there must obviously be a prior
guiding concept of what is as such. Especially where this
thinking conceives itself mathematically and grounds
itself mathematically, the projection of what is as such
must bt~ expressly made the foundation of everything.
Thus the~ inquiry into the special realms must be preceded
by one ·which asks about what is in general, i.e., metaphysics
~JS generally asking about what is, the metaphysic(!
generalis. Viewed from it, theology. cosmology1 and psychology
become the metaphysica speeialis, because they
inquire fin to a particUlar realm of what is.
But because metaphysics is now mathematical, the general
canmot· remain what is only suspended above the
particul1ar, but the particular must be derived from the
general a:~.s the axiomatic according to principles. This signifies
tb.at in the mathematica generalis what belongs to
what is as such, what determines and circumscribes the
tbingnes.s of a thing as such, must be determined in prin·
ciple according to axioms, especially according .to the first
axiom; according to the schema of positing and thinking
as such. What is a thing must be decided in advance from
the highest principles of all principles and propositions,
i.e., from1 pure reason, before one can reasonably deal with
the divine, worldly, and human.
The un:iversat advance illumination of all things accord·
ing to their thingness out of the pure reason of rational
thought 1as such, the enlightening as this advance clarification
of all things, is the Enlightenment, the spirit of the
cighteen1th century. In that century modem philosophy
first rece!ived its proper form, into which Kant's thought
grows and which also bears and determines his own most
novel inquiry. the form of metaphysics, without which
that of the nineteenth century would be unthinkable.
112 WHAT JS A THING?
7. RatioJtal Metaphysics (Wolff, Baumgarten)
Between Descartes and the Enlightenment stands
Leibniz. But he had an effect less through his own thinking
and work Lhan through the form of the school of philos·
ophy he determined.
During the eighteenth century scientific and philosophical
thought in Germany was dominated by the doctrine
and school of Christian WolJf (1679-1754 ). He took his
philosophical equipment from a particular interpretation
of the philosophy of Leibniz. From there he strove for an
essential 1:1Dification of the philosophical foundation
achieved by Descartes with traditional medieval Scholas·
ticism and thus at the same time a reunification of Plato
and Aristotle. All of Western metaphysical knowledge was
to be gathered up in the rational clearness of the En·
ligbtenment and the humanity of man to be based on itself
in pure reason. Christian Wolff treated philosophy in
widely distributed German and Latin textbooks. His textbook
on metaphysics carries (in the German version) the
significant title, which, after what has been said, must now
be understandable, Rational Thoughts of God, the World
and the Soul of Man, and Also of All Things in General
(1719). Wolff first taught in Halle as professor of mathematics
and soon transferred to philosophy. His thorough
and rigorous way of teaching presented a serious threat to
the shallow chatter of the theologians of the time; he was
thus driven out of Halle in 1723 through the efforts of his
theological opponents. He was threatened with hanging if
he remained. He taught at Marburg from 1723-40. However,
Frederick the Great did not agree with the inethod\of
refuting a philosophy by the threat of the gallows, and he
called Wolff back to Halle. There he became chancellor of
the University, privy counciUor, vice-president of the
Petersburg Academy, and baron of the Holy Roman Empire.
Prominent among the many students of WolJf were
Kcm.t's Mantzer of Asking About the Thing 113
Gottsched (1700-76) and Alexander Baumgarten (1714-
62); the IaUer also wrote a metaphysics (Metaphysica,
1739). More<>ver, in accord with the general trend of the
dominating form of pure reason, he at tempted the experiment
of submitting art to rational principles (and our
relation to art, which, according to the prevailing interpretation,
was taste). Taste and what is accessible in this
capacity to judge (namely art) belong to the domain of the
sensible, al.af'lfT''l· Just as thought is submitted to rational
principles in·logic, so also there is need for a rational doctrine
of sensiibillty. a logic of the sensible, a.'lafr,ac-r. Baumgarten
therefore called this rational theory of a.iufrpctt the
logic of sensibility or '"'aesthetics.'' And despite Kant's opposition
to the use of this title, the philosophicaJ doctrine
of art bas been called aesthetics ever since. This circumstance
contai111s much more than the mere matter of a tide,
and can be u~lderstood only through modem metaphysics.
It became decisive not only for the interpretation of art,
but also for the position of art in human existence
(Dasein) in the age of Goethe, Schiller, Schelling, and
Hegel ..
through his teacher, the Wolffian disciple Martin
Knutzen, ICai1t himself stands in the tradition of the Leibniz-
Wolftian 5tchool. All his writings before the Critique
of Pure Reasc:.•n move within the sphere of inquiry and the
mode of thought of the contemporary school-philosophy.
even in parts ·where Kant already goeS his own ways. Only
incidentally, it might be mentioned. did Kant move beyond
the sch<K>l tradition and penetrate directly into the
philosophy of Leibniz-insofar as this was then possible.
In a similarly direct way he made the thinking through of
English philolsophy, especially Hume, fruitful for the forenation
of his. own questioning. On the whole, however.
lhc school-philosophy of Leibniz-Wol.ffian stamp remained
s.o predominant that Kant, even after he gained the new
position of this philosophy (after the publication of the
Critique of Pure Reason and the works which followed it).
114 WHAT IS A THING?
kept up the tradition of using the textbooks of the scboolpbilosopby
in his lectures and of explaining them paragraph
by paragraph. Kant never discussed his philosophy
in his lectures, although, in later timest the new method of
thought could not be completely excluded in the discussions
of the textbooks or "readers," as they were then
called. Kant used the previously mentioned textbook by
Alexander Baumgarten in his lectures in metaphysics and
appreciated this textbook "especially for the richness and
precision of its teaching method." (Nachricht von der
Einrichtung seiner Vorlesungen im Winterhalbjahr 1765-
66, K. Vorliinder, ed. [Meiner, Der Philosophischen Bib/iotelc,
1906], XL VIa, ISS.) (Compare Prolegomena, 1-3.) In
this short piece Kant indicates how he intends to adapt his
former lectures on metaphysics,logic. ethics, and physical
geography to a changed teaching method.
He introduces metaphysics, the .. most difficult among
all philosophical investigations," by preceding it with a
nretaphysical experiential science of man in order to lead
to metaphysics step by step. This has the advantage in
metaphysics "of putting into the greatest clarity" the abstract
by presenting the concrete in advance. But this procedure
has still another advantage. Kant says about it: "I
cannot help thinking of another· advantage, which should
not be valued as slight, though it is based upon incidental
causes only, an advantage which I want to draw from this
method. Everyone knows how eagerly attended the first
lectures are by the keen and unsettled youth, and how
later the lecture room becomes somewhat roomier. Ontology.
a science that is difficult to comprehend, scares him
off from continuing: then what he could perhaps have
understood cannot be of the slightest further use to him."
The textbook by Baumgarten presents us with the form
of the customary metaphysics of the eighteenth century,
which Kant had before him and which finally forced hiJD
to the work by which he lifted metaphysics from its binges
and put the question anew about metaphysics.
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 115
TheMetaphysica of Baumgarten divides the entire ma ..
terlal of m:etaphysics into exactly one thousand short paragraphs.
A~ccording to Scholastic organization, the entire
work is divided into four parts: ( 1) Ontology (Metaphysica
gc~neralis ), §§4-350; (2) Cos1nologia~ §§351-500;
(3) Psycltologia, §§501-799; ( 4) Theologia natura/is,
§§800-1000.
But the presentation of this external form does not tell
us much a1bout rational metaphysics, th~ metaphysics of
pure reasc•n, even when we remember what has been said
about the fundamental characteristic of modem metaphysics
and Its foundation. On. the other hand, we cannot
go into thet total content, which, although in itself is not so
extensive, does, however, present a very involved structure
because of its mathematicaJ.rational form and formal
proof.
And yet it is necessary that we provide ourselves with a
more definite idea of this Metaphysica, in order to achieve
with some! understanding the transition from it to the
Critique o;f Pure Reason. Let us characterize this metaphysics
by discussing three questions: ( 1) How does metaphysics
determine· its own concept of itself? (2) How in
this immediately pre-Kantian metaphysics is the essence
of truth w1derstood? (Metaphysics would represent the
highest human realization of truth in knowledge.) ( 3)
What is the inner structure of metaphysics?
By answering these three questions we once more carry
out a unifi.t~d consideration of the mathematical basis of
modem me:taphysics. We will see what this metaphysics of
pure reaso1n claims to be. Above all, we shall understand
what form the question about the thing has taken in it.
I. How does metaphysics define its own concept? The
first paragraph reads as follows: "Metaphysica est scientia
prima cognitionis humanae principia continens.''
("Metaphysics is the science which contains [embraces]
the first principles of human knowledge.") This definition
of metaphysics arouses the suspicion that metaphysics is
116 WHAT IS A THING?
concerned with a doctrine of knowledae, thus with epistemology.
But up to now metaphysics was considered as the
science of what is, as such, i.e., of the being of what is.
However, this metaphysics, just as the old one, is concerned
with what is as well as with being; and yet the defining
concept of metaphysics does not immediately say
anything about that. Not imm~diately. The definition,
however, says just as little that the object of metaphysics
is knowledge as sucb. We must understand this definition
of the concept of metaphysics in such a way that cognitio
ln1mana does not mean the human faculty of knowledge,
but that which is knowable and known by the pure reason
of man. That is, what is. Its "fundamental principles" will
be exhibited, i.e., the fundamental determination of its
essence, being. But why does the definition of the concept
not simply say this, as Aristotle already defined it: •saT,.,
i~'l Tlf. t) 6anp~i .., ;,. 3v V lv Ked 1'U TUiT't i'lfl'y)(f•VT14 tcc&9'atl1'o.
("There is a science which investigates being as being and
the attn"butes which belong to this in virtue of its own
nature.'') (Metaphysics, IV, from the beginning.)
Why are the knQwable and knowledge now mentioned?
Because .. since Descartes. the faculty of knowledge, pure
reason, has been established as that by whose guideline all
definitions of what is, the thing, are to. be made in rigorous
proof and grounding. The mathematical is the "mente
concipere" of Galileo. In the development of metaphysics,
it is now a question of positinl out of the essence of pure
rational knowledge a sketch of the being of what is, that
will be decisive for everything further knowable. This happens
first in the fundamental discipline of metaphysics, in
ontologia. According to §4. it is. the scient ill praedicatorurn
entis generaliorunt. Kant (Op. cit., pp. 115 f.) translates
this as follows: "The science of the general attributes of
all things." We see from this that the concept of the
"thing'~ is apprehended as very broad, as broadly as possible.
"Thing" is anything that is. God, soul, and the world
are also things .. We further recognize that the thingness of
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 1 17
things is determined on the basis of and by the guideline
of the principles of pure reason. We have met three such
principl~es, the 1-principle, the principle of contradiction,
and the principle of sufficient reason. With this we stand
immedia1tely before the answer to the second question.
2. In the pre-Kantian metaphysics of the eighteenth
century, how is the nature of that truth understood, whose
highest ]human realization in knowledge should be rep~
sen ted by metaphysics?
According to the traditional concept, truth ( veritas) is
the ada4~quatio intellectus et rei, the correspondence of
thought and thing. Instead of adaeqUiltio one also says
comtnen.suratio or convenientia, fitting or agreement. This
essential definition of truth has a dual meaning which
guided the question of the truth even in the Middle Ages.
There is still cast over it the reflection and afterglow of
an earlie:r, more primordial, although hardly understood,
experience of the essence of truth at the beginning of the
Greek e11dstence (Dasein ). Truth as adaequatio is, in one
sense, a ·definition of ratio, the assertion, the proposition.
A proposition is true insofar as it corresponds to things.
The defiJ11ition of truth as correspondence, however, not
only contcems. the proposition in relation to things, but
also thin.gs, insof~ as they are created, based on the project
of a creative spirit, and as they correspond to it. Conceived
iln this way, quth is the commensurability of
things with their essence, thought by God.
We an~ asking, in contrast, What is the essential definition
of truth in modem metaphysics? In §92 of his Metaphysik,
llaumgarten gives the following definition. "Veri·
las metaphysica potest definiri per convenientiam entis
cum pri111cipiis catholicis." ("Metaphysical truth [that is,
the truth of metaphysical knowledge] can be defined as
an agreement of what is with the first most universal
fundamental principles.") Principia catholica. are the principles
(a:doms ), specifically the "catholic ones" (according
to th(! Greek ~ea6oAoa•), i.e., principles directed upon the
118 WHAT JS A THING?
whole, which assert something about what is in totality
and about the being of what is. All metaphysical propositions
which establish being and its determinations ·must
conform to these principles. These principles are ironclad
principles of reason itself: the 1-principle, the principle of
contradiction, and the principle of sufficient reason. The
truth about what things in their thingness are is determined
according to the principles of pure reason, i.e., as
we defined it above, in the essential sense: mathematical.
The inner structure of the whole of metaphysics must be
formed according to this conceptio11 of truth. Thus -we
arrive at the third question.
3. What is the inner structure of this metaphysics? We
can already gather it from the external arrangement and
sequence of the discipline. The foundation is ontology, and
the apex of the building is theology. The first is concerned
with what belongs to a thing as such, to anything that is
in general (or in communi). to the ens commune. Theology
is concerned with the highest being and that which is, in
the most essential sense, the summum ens. With regard to
content we also find this arrangement of metaphysics in
the Middle Ages, in fact even in Aristotle. However, what is
decisive is that, in the meantime. through the development
and self-clarification of modern thought as the mathematical,
the claim of pure reason has come to predominate.
This means that the most general determinations of the being
of what is are to be projected on the ground and with
the guidance of the most universal principles of pure rea·
son. At the same time, however, the entire knowledge of
the world, soul, and God is to be derived from these most
universal concepts in a purely rational analysis and
sequence.
So the pure inner lawfulness of reason, from out of its
fundamental principles and concepts, decides about the
being of what is, about the thingnessof things. In this pure
·rational knowledge, the truth about what is for all human
reason receives its foundation and form as an indubitable
and universally binding certainty.
Kan.t''s Manner of Asking About the Thing 119
Pure reason in this its self-formation. pure reason in
this claim, pu1re reason as the authoritative court of appeal
for the deterntination of the thingness of all things as such
-it is this pu:re reason which Kant places into "critique."
II. The~ Question About the Thing in Kant's
Main Work
1. What Does 11Cr.itique" Mean in Kant?
We will not pursue how Kant himself arrives at this
"critique" and what the internal and external history of
the origin of the work Critique of Pure Reason is. It is
characteristic that we find out little even from letters of
this silent period of his. However, even if we knew more,
if we could mtactly reckon what influenced Kant and so
forth, in what .sequence he worked out the individual parts
of the work, this would neither explain the work itself (the
creative is ine~plicable ), nor would this curiosity about
Kant's workshop serve our understanding, supposing that
we do not already know and comprehend what Kant
wanted and achieved in his work. This is now our sole
concenL More: exactly, as preliminary, we want to understand
the title ..
We know now what "pure reason" means. It remains
to inquire what "critique" .signifies. It can here only be a
matter of givi1ng a preliminary explanation of what "critique"
means. Usually we take this word at once and above
all in a negative sense. Critique is for us faultfinding, a
pointing to er-rors, emphasis on incompleteness and the
corresponding rejection. In citing the title "Critique of
Pure Reason" -.we inust avoid this common and misleading
meaning from 1the beginning. Moreover. that meaning does
not correspond to the original meaning of the word. "Critique"
comes from theGreek•plvew, which means "to sort"
(sondern), "to• sort out" and thus "to lift out that of special
sort" ( da.s Besondere herausheben ). This contrast
against others :arises from an elevation of a new order. The
120 WHAT IS A THING?
sense of the term '1critique" is so little negative that it
means the most positive of the positive, the positing of
what must be established in advance in all positing as what
is determinative and decisive. Therefore, critique is a deci·
sion in this positing sense. Because critique is a separation
and lifting· out of the special, the uncommon and, at the
same time, decisive, therefore, and only in consequence, is
it also a rejection of the commonplace and unsuitable.
This meaning of the word "critique" appears in a
unique way of its own during the second half of the eighteenth
century in the discussions of art, of the form of the
works of art and our relation towards them. Critique
meant establishing the standard. the rules, legislation;
and this at the same time means the elevation of the ·general-
over against the special. In this contemporary direction
of meaning lies Kant's use of the term "critique,"
which he afterward also included in the titles .of two
other main works: Critique of Practical Reason and
Critique of Judgment.
However, this word receives a fuller sense through
Kant's work. It is this sense which must now be outlined.
This wiD first make it possible to understand by implication
the negative meaning, which the word also bad in
Kant. We shall try to make this clear by a retrospective
glance at what has already been presented, without really
having yet gone into Kant's work.
If critique has the designated positive meaning. the
Critique of Pure Reason will not simply reject and find
fault with pure reason. To "criticize" will rather aim to delimit
what is de~isive and peculiar to its proper essence.
This laying of limits ( Grenzziehung) is not primarily a demarcation
against ... but a delimiting in the sense of an
exhibition of the inner construction of pure reason. The
lifting out of the elements and the structure of pure rea·
son is a lifting out of different possibilities of the uses of
reason and their corresponding rules. As Kant once emphasized
(A 768, B 196): the critique makes a complete reKant's
Manner of Asking About the Thing 121
view of the ~vhole faculty of pure reason; it draws and
sketches, in one of Kant's words, the "outline" (Vorriss)
of pure reason ( B xxiii, N.K.S., p. 25 ).
Critique tbus becomes the surveying which sets the
boundaries fd•r the entire domain of pure reason. This sur·
veying does not take place, as Kant expressly and ever
again enjoins., by referring to "facts" ("Paktis"). but it
occurs fr()m principles; not by determining qualities met
somewhere, but by determining the whole essence of pure
reason out of its own principles. Critique is a setting of
boundaries, sL surveying project of pure reason. Therefore,
an esseratial moment belonging to critique is what
Kant calls the;~ architectonic. J
Arcbitectotuc, the blueprint projected as the essential
structure of IJure reason, is as little a mere "ornament"
(Aufputz) as the- critique is a mere "censor" (Zensur).
(For the use elf the term ,.architectonic," see Leibniz, De
Primae Philo•sophiae Emendatione, and Baumgarten,
Metaphysica, §4, ontologia as metaphysica architectonica..)
In the execution of the. "critique" of pure reason so understood,.
the ·"mathematical" in the fundamental sense
first comes to its unfolding and, at the same time, to its
being lifted UJ, (Au.fhebung)~i.e., to its own limit. This also
results from the "critique.'' Precisely, critique lies in the
trend of mod..ern thinking as such and in modern metaphysics
in particular. But because of its basic character,
Kant's 41 Critique'' leads to.a new delimiting of pure reason
and at the san1e time, therefore, of the mathematical.
2. The Relation of the "Critique" of Pure Reason to the
"System of ,4/l Principles of the Pure Understanding"
It is no accident that Kant continually accompanies the
critique of pure reason by a reflection on the essence of
the mathematjical and of mathematics, by a distinguishing
between mathematical reason in the narrower sense over
122 WHAT IS A THING?
against metaphysical reason, i.e., the reasoning upon
which a metaphysics, a projection of the being of what is,
the thingness of things, must be based; for everyt.bi:ng actually
depends on this grounding of metaphysics. Let us
recall Baumgarten's definition of metaphysics and of the
definition of metaphysical truth. Critique of pure reason
means to delimit the determination of the being of what
is, the thingness of the things, from out of pure reason:; it
means to survey and project those principles of pure reason
upon whose ground something like a thing in its thing·
ness is detennined.
We can already gather from this that in this "critique"
the "mathematical" feature of modem metaphysics is retained,
namely, to determine in advance out of principles
the being of what is. The real effort aims at the formation
and grounding of this "mathematical." The principles of
pure reason must be grounded and demonstrated according
to their own character. At the same time it lies in .the
essence of these principles that they exhibit a basic relation
among themselves, belong together uniformly out of
an inner unity. Kant calls such a unity according to princi·
pies a ••system." The critique as a surveying of the inner
structure and foundation of pure reason thus faces the
fundamental task of exhibiting and grounding the System
of the Principles of Pure Reason.
We know from our earlier discussion that, already for
Aristotle. the proposition as simple assertion was the
guideline for the determinations of being (the thingness)
of things, i.e., the categories. The assertion "the house is
high" is also called a judgment. Judging is an act of
thought. Judging is a particular way in which reason takes
place and acts. Pure reason as judging reason Kant qtlls
understanding, the pure understanding. Propositions and
assertions are acts of the understanding. The system of the
principles of all propositions for which he sought is, therefore,
the system of the principles of pure understanding.
We shall seek to understand Kant's Critique of Pure
Kard's Manner of Asking About the Thing 123
Reason frotn its ground·providing ~nter. Therefore, we
begin our interpretation at the place entitled "System
of All Principles of Pure Understanding'' (A 148, B 187).
The whole ]passage under discussion includes A 235 and
B 294.
An aim of the interpretation will be to direct our inquiry
and knowledge through this part in such a way that there
results an wnderstanding of the entire work. But even this
understanditng is only in the service of an insight into the
question "What is a thing?"
In preparation, we can read some single sections from
the work, w·here the real posing of the question does not
immediately appear, but which are suited for shedding
light on sonae of Kant's basic concepts. Attention is called
to three su':h sections: ( 1) A 19, B 33-A 22, B 36.2; (2)
A SO, B 74-A 62; B 86: (3) A 298, B 355-A 320, B 371.
In contl'a1St, it is not recommended that one read the
prefaces to 44 and B at this time, and especially not the corresponding
Introductions, because they presuppose an insight
into the whole work.
In our interpretation we shall not try to examine and
paraphrase the structure of the work from the outside.
Rather, we shall place ourselves within the structure itself
in order to discover something of its framework and to
gain the standpoint for viewing the whole.
For this we shall only follow a direction which Kant
himself ono~ stated in an incidental reflection. It concerns
the evaluation of philosophic work: "One has to begin
one's evaluation With the whole and to direct it to the
idea of the ~Nork together with its ground. What remains
belongs to the exposition in which much can be lacking
and be improved." (Preussische Akademie edition, op.
ci1., XVIII, No. 5025.)
Critique uf pure reason is first a measuring and surveying
of its essence and structure. The critique does not reject
pure reason, but for the first time sets it within the
boundaries ,of its nature and its inner unity.
124 WHAT IS A THING?
"Critique" is the self-knowledge of reason placed before
itself and upon itself. ~·critique" is the accomplishment
of the innermost rationality of reason. "Critique•• fulfills
the enlightenment (Aufkliirung) of reason. Reason- is
knowledge from principles and therefore itself the faculty
Qf principles (Prinzipien) and axioms (Grundsatz.e). A
critique of the pure reason in the positive sense must,
therefore, set forth the principles of pure reason in their
inner unity and completeness, i.e., in their system.
3. Interpretation of the Second Main Section of the
Transcendental Analytic: "System of All
Principles of Pure Und~rstanding"
The selection of just this section from the entire' work
may at first appear arbitrary. It can at least be justified
in that this chapter provides us with special insight with
regard to our leading question, the question of the thingness
of the thing. Yet, at the moment, even this remains
only an assertion~ The question arises whether just this
chapter has such a special meaning for Kant himself and
for how he conceived his work, that is, whether we. speak
in Kant's sense when we call this section the center of the
• work. This question is to be answered affirmatively. For
in the formation and unified proof of this system of all
principles of pure understanding, Kant gains the ground
upon which the truth of the knowledge of the things is
based. In this way Kant lifts out and delimits (critique) a
domain from which alone the status of the determination
of the thing and ilietruth of all metaphysics up to now
can be originally decided: whether the essence of truth is
truly determined in it, whether in it a truly rigorously axiomatic,
i.e., mathematical, knowledge, unequivocally fol·
lows its course and thereby reaches its goal; or whether
this rational metaphysics, as Kant says, is only "a groping
about," and indeed a groping about in 4 ~mere concepts"
without a relation to the things themselves, thus remaining
· without justification and validity. The surveying of
R~ant's Man.ner of Asking About the Thing 125
pure reason with regard to metaphysics must at the s.ame
time gaUJge ( ab-messen), out of pure reason, how meta.physics
(according to its definition as the science of the
first caus·es of human knowledge) is possible. What is the
status of human knowledge and its truth?
(The f.ollowing interpretation makes up for what the
writing B.~ant and the Problem of the Metaphysics (1929)
lacked. Compare the preface to the second edition, 1950.
The tide of that essay is not precise and therefore easily
leads to the misunderstanding that The Problem of Metaphysics
i!; concerned with a problematic whose overcoming
was the task of metaphysics. Rather, The Problem of
Metaphy~iics indicates that metaphysics as such is ques·
tionable.)
·Kant offers a review of this second chapter, in which
be treats the- system of all principles. He does so at the
beginnini' of the chapter entitled "The Ground of the Distinction
C>f All Objects in General into Phenomena and
NoumenaL'' (A 235, B 294 ). In an intuitive simile he explains
what mattered to him in establishing the "System
of All Principles of Pure Understanding." "We have now
not merely explored the territory of pure understanding,
and carefully surveyed every part of it. but have also measured
its extent, and assigned to everything its rightful
place. Thlis domain is an island, enclosed by nature itself
within unalterable limits. It is the land of truth-enchant·
ing name~!-surrounded by a wide and stonny ocean, and
the native! home of illusion. where many a fog bank and
many a ""iftly melting iceberg give the deceptive appear·
ance of falrther shores, deluding the adventurous seafarer
ever anev11 with empty hopes, and engaging him in enterprises
which be can never abandon and yet is unable to
carry to completion" (N.K.S., p. 257 ).
a. Kant's Concept of Experience
The mt~sured and surveyed land, the solid ground of •
truth, is t:he domain of the established and establishable
126 WHAT IS A THING?
knowledge. Kant ca1ls this "experience!' Thus the question
arises: What is the essence of experience? The "System
of All Principles of Pure Understanding'' is nothing
other than a sketch of the essence and essential structure
of experience. The essence of a fact ( Sache), according to
modern metaphysics, is what makes the fact as such in
itself possible: the possibility, possibilitas, understood
as- that which renders possible. The question of the essence
of experience is the question of its inner possibility.
What belongs to the essence of experience? But at the
same time this includes the question: What is the essence
of what becomes truly accessible in experience? For when
Kant uses the word "experience.'' he always understands
it in an essentially twofold sense:
( 1 ) Experiencing as happening to and an act of the
subject I. (2) That as such which- is experienced in such
experience. Experience in the sense of the experienced and
the experienceable, the object of experience, is nature, but
nature understood in the sense of Newton's Principia as
systema mundi. The grounding of the inner possibility of
experience is, therefore, for Kant at the same time the answer
to the question: How is nature in general possible'?
The answer is given in the "System of All Principles of the
Pure Understanding.'' Kant, therefore, also says (P.rolegomena,
§ 23) that these principles constitute •fa physiological
(physiologisches) system or.system of nature." In §24
he also calls them the "physiological principles." .. Physiology"
is understood here in the original and archaic
sense, and not in the sense of today. Physio1Qgy today is
the doctrine of life processes, In distinction from morphology
as the doctrine of living forms. In Kant's
ilsage it meant AoytX of the ~~m", the fundamental assertions
about nature, however, •.xr~ is now used in Newton's
sense.
Only when we expressly and in a grounded way take possession
of the solid ground of provable knowledge, of the
land of experience and of the map of this land, do we take
a position from which we can decide about the prerogative
~~ant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 127
and pretenses of traditional rational metaphysics, i.e.,
about its possibility.
The setting up of the system ·of principles is the taking
possessic•n of the solid land of the possible truth of know}..
edge. It is the decisive step of the whole task of the critique
of pure n=ason. This system of principles is the result of a
unique analysis of the essence of experience. Kant once
wrote in a letter to his pupilJ. S. Beck, on January 20,
1792, ten :years after the appearance of the Critique of Pure
Reason·: uThe analysis of experience in general and the
principle:s of possibility of the latter 'are' the most difficult
of the enltire critique." (Brief, Cassirer X, 114; Akadamie
edition, )1{1, 3!3tf.) In the same letter, Kant gives these
instructi()ns for lecturing on this most difficult part
of the c,.itique of Pure Reason: "In a word, since this
whole an'a.lysis has only the intention of setting forth the
fact that experience itself is possible only by means of
certain synthetic a priori principles, but since this can first
be made properly comprehensible only when these principles
are actually presented, they are to be put to work as
quickly as possible." Here a twofold point must be
stressed:
1. The decisive thing for the proper insight into the
essence of experience, i.e., the truth of knowledge, is the
C.J:tual prt!lentation of the system of principles.
2. The preparation for this presentation should be as
concise at; possible.
Hence, we fulfill only a clear instruction of Kant•s when
we single out the system of principles and set up the interpretation
of this section in such a way that all preliminary
requ.irements for it are summarized as concisely as
possible and are furnished in the development of the in•
tcrpretation itself.
b. 1rhe Thing as a Natural Thing (Naturding)
The ~item of principles of pure understanding is. in
Kant's most exact sense, the inner supporting center of
128 WHAT IS A THING?
the entire work. This system of principles is to unlock for
us the question of how Kant determines the essence of the
thing. What has been said in the preceding about the significance
of the system of principles already gives us a pre,.
liminary interpretation (Vordeutung) of bow Kant circumscribes
the essence of the thing and in what way he
holds it to be determinable at all.
.. "Thing"-this is the object of our experience. Since the
inclusive concept of the possibly experienceable is nature,
the thing must actually be conceived in truth as a natural
thing. Kant does explicitly distinguish between the thing
as an appearance (Erscheinung) and as thing-in-itself
(Ding an sich ). But the thing-in-itself, i.e., detached from
and taken out of eve~ relation of manifestatiQ,n ( Bekundung)
for us, remains for us a mere x. In every thing as an
appearance we unavoidably think also of this x. However,
only the appearing natural thing is determinable in truth
and knowable as ·a thing. We shall summarize in two propositions
Kant's answer to the question about the essence
of the thing which·is accessible to us: ( 1) The thing is a
natural thing. (2) The thing is the object of possible experience.
Here every word is essential, and this in the
definite meaning which it has acquired through Kant's
philosophical work.
Let us now briefly recall the introductory considera·
tions at the beginning of the whole lecture. There we
placed the question about the thing into the circle of what
first of all surrounds and encounters us every day. At that
time the question arose how the objects of physics, i.e.,
the natural things, are related to the things immediately
encountered. In view of Kant's essential definition of the
essence of the thing as a natural thing, we can judge that
from the beginning Kant does not pose the question of the
thingness of the things that surround us. This question has
no weight for him. His view immediately fixes itself on the
thing as an object of mathematical-physical science.
That this viewpoint in the determination of the thingK.
ant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 129
ness of tbe thing became decisive for Kant has reasons
which we now, after an acquaintance with the prehistory
of the Crilrique of Pure Reason, can easily appraise. How ..
ever, the ~lefinition of the thing as a natural thing also has
consequences for which we cannot hold Kant in the least
responsible. One could pay homage to the opinion that
skipping c,ver the things that surround us and the interpre·
tation of ~heir thingness is an omission for which we can
easily make up and which can be fitted onto the definition
of natural things, or perhaps. could also be pre-arranged.
But this is impossible because the definition of the thing
and the way it is set up include fundamental presuppositions
whi•ch extend over the whole of being and to the
meaning c•f being in general. If we do not otherwise admit
it,. indirecdy we can at least learn this from Kant's definition
of th-e thing, namely, that a s~le thin~ for itself is
not s:ssible and, therefore, the de ition o things can ..
not carried out by considering single things. The thing
as a natural thing is only definable from the essence of a
nature in general. The thing, in the sense of what we encounter
cllosest to us-before all theory and science-is
adequately and first of all definable in a relational conteXt
which lie!; before and above all nature. This goes so far
as to say that even tecllnological things, though they
are -seemiJ1gly first produced on the basis of scientific natural
kno'-'1ledge, are in their thingness (Dinghaftigkeit)
somethinll other than natural things with the superimposition
o·f a practical application.
But, all this only means again that asking the question
of the thil1tg is nothing less than the knowing man taking a
decisive foothold in the midst of what is, taken as a whole.
In thinkintg through the question of the thing sufficiently
and in mastering, not mastering or neglecting it, there oc·
cur decisions whose temporal scope and span in our history
are always to be considered only after centuries. This
discussion of Kant's step should give us the proper proportions
for such decisions.
130 WHAT IS A.THING?
c. The Threefold Division of the Chapter on the
System of the Principles
The chapter ("Hauptstilck") of the Critique of Pu~.e
Reason which we shall try to expound begins at A 148,
B 181 and is entitled "System of All Principles of Pure
Understanding.''
The whole chapter, which goes to A 235, B 294, is divided
into three sections: I. "The Highest Principle of All Ana·
lytic Judgments" (A 150, B 189-A 153, B 193). II. "The
Highest Principle of All Synthetic Judgments" (A 154, B
193-A 158, B 197). III. "Systematic Representation of All
the Synthetic Principles of Pure Understanding'' (A 158, B
197-A 235, B 287 ).
There fQilows a "General Note on the System of the
Principles'' (B 288-B 294 ).
With this threefold division of Kant's doctrine of the
principles, we immediately think of the three principles of
traditional metaphysics: contradiction .. 1-principle, and
the principle of sufficient reason. It is to be supposed that
Kant's threefold division has an inner relation with the
threefold number of traditional principles. The exposition
will show in what sense this is true. First, let us pay attention
to the titles and first to those of the first two sections:
we find the concept of the highest principle, and each time
for a whole range of judgments. The general title of the
whole chapter comprehends the principles as such of pure
understanding. Now the discussion concerns principles
of judgment. With what justification? Understanding is
the faculty of thinking. But thinking is the uniting of representations
(Vorstellungen) in one consciousness. "I
think" means "I combine:'' Representadonally, I rel•te
something represented to another: "The room is warm";
"Wormwood is bitter"; "The sun shines." "The union of
representations in one consciousness is judgment. Thinking,
therefore, is the same as judging or relating representations
to judgments." (Prolegomena§ 22.)
Kar.rt's Manner of Asking About the Thing 131
Consequc~ntly, when instead of"pure underst~ding'' as
in the main title of the chapter, it now says ''judgment" in
the titles of the first two sections, this refers substantially
to the same thing. Judgment is only the way in which the
understanding as the faculty of thinking carries out the
representilll~· Why in general "judgment" is used, and not
pure under!itanding. will become clear in the content of
the sections. (What "performs'' these acts, the performance
.and wlhat is performed, is the unity of representations,
and it is that as itself a represented unity, e.g., the
shining sun in the judgment: .. The sun is shining.'')
At the satne time we obtain from the first two titles a
distinction elf judgments into analytic and synthetic. In
his polemic against Eberhard, On a Discovery, According
to Which Al'l New Critique of Pure Reason is Made Dispensable
by czn Older One ( 1790), Kant once remarked that
it is "indispc!nsably necessary" in order to solve the chief
problem of the critique of pure reason to "have a clear •nd
distinct conc:ept of what the critique first understands in
general by synthetic judgments as distinct from the analytic."
"The .aforementioned distinction of judgmeats has
never been. properly comprehended" (On a Discovery,
op. cit., p. 228).
Accordin@:ly, in the titles of the first and second sections
of the chapt€~r on the "System of All Principles of Pure Undcrstandingt
in the distinction between synthetic and
analytic jud,gments and the nighest principles belonging
to them, son:aething is pointed out which is decisive for the
entire range of questions of the critique of pure reason.
Therefore, it is not an accident that Kant, in the lntroduct
ion to this w·ork. deals explicitly and in advance with "The
Distinction between Analytic and Synthetic Judgments"
(A 6 ff., B 10 ff.).
But just as important as the content of the first two
titles is the title of the third section. This title does not
concern principles of analytic nor of synthetic judgments,
but syntheti•c principles of the pure understanding. And
132 WHAT IS A THING?
precisely the systematic "representation" (presentation)
of these is the essential aim of the whole chapter.
It now seems appropriate to preface the interpretation
of these three sections with a discussion of the difference
between synthetic and analytic judgments. But in accord·
ance with the overall plan of our interpretation we prefer
to deal with this difference where the text immediately demands
it. We pass over the introductory considerations
to the chapter since these (A 148-B 187) are understandable
only with reference to the preceding chapters of the
work,. into which we shall not enter. We begin immediately
with the interpretation of the first section.
4. The Highest Principle of All Analytic Judgments.
Knowledge antl Object (A 150 fl., B 190 fl.)
In the title to Section I the principle of contradiction is
meant as it was as one of three fundamental axioms of traditional
metaphysics. But the fact that this principle is
here called ,.the highest principle of all analytic judgments"
already expresses Kant's special conception of
this principle. With this he distinguishes himself both
from the preceding metaphysics as well as from the German
Idealism which follows, at least that of Hegel. Kant•s
general intent in his interpretation of the principle of con·
tradiction is to contend against the leading role which
this principle had assumed, especially in modern metaphysics.
This role of the principle of contradiction as the
highest axiom of all knowledge of being was already set
forth by Aristotle even if in another sense (Metaphysics.
IV, chap. 3-6 ).
At the end of the third chapter ( 1005 b 33) Aristotle
says: ~.Jue., yap dpJP, ~tal .,w., /J.),J.,.,., &lt~~~JJA~T.,,., at~ ...a • .., .. ,. ("For
this is naturally the starting point even for all the other
axioms." )29
:zc• Heidegger's translation: "Vom Sein her gesehen ist dieser
Satz sogar auch der Grund (Prinzip) aller der ~deren Axiomc
(Grundsiitze)." Trans.
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 133
In 1755, in his qualifying lecture (Habilitationsschrift),
Kant had already ventured a first, although as yet uncertain,
thnJst against the dominance in metaphysics of the
principlE: of contradiction. This little writing bears the
significaJlt title Principiorum primorum cognitionis metaphysicae
.nova dilucidatio (A New Illumination of the
First Pri'nciples of M.etaphysical Knowledge). This title
could also head the Critique of Pure Reason, written
nearly thirty years later.
a. Knowledge as Human Knowledge
It is true that the elucidation of the principle of contradiction
b1 the Critique of Pure Reason moves an a diJferent,
exp1ressly established plane and in a clear, fully
thought 1out domain. This is immediately revealed in the
ftrst sentence with which the section begins: "The universal,
though merely negative, condition of all our judgments
in general, whatever be the content of our knowledge,
and however it may relate to the object, is that they
be not sE~lf-contradictory; for if self-contradictory, these
judgments are in themselves, even without reference to
the object~ null and void." (A 150, B 189, N.K.S., p.189.)
Here i1: is said in general that all our knowledge is under
the condiition that all its judgments be free of contradiction.
Nevertheless, beyond this general content, we must
note in this sentence of Kant's something different that is
decisive for all that follows.
1. The sentence is about "our knowledge," which means
hlt1nan klnowledge, not indefinitely any knowledge of any
knowing being, not even about a knowledge simply and in
general, Cltf knowledge in an absolute sense. Rather it is we.
mankind., our knowledge and only it is in question here
and in the entire Critique of Pure Reason. Only in reference
to a !knowledge that is not absolute does it make sense
ut all to set up the principle of contradiction as a con·
dition: fo•r absolute unconditioned knowledge cannot be
under conditions at all. What is a contradiction for finite
134 WHAT IS A THING?
knowledge does not need to be one for absolute knowledge.
Therefore, when in German Idealism Schelling and
especially Hegel at once posit the essence of knowledge as
absolute, then it is appropriate that for such knowing noncontradiction
is not a condition of knowledge, but rather
vice versa: contradiction becomes precisely the proper
element of knowledge.
2. It is said that our judgments and not our cognitions
(Erkennlnisse) must be without contradiction; this signifies
that judgments, as acts of our understanding, constitute
an essential; but only one, ingredient of our .knowledge.
3. It is said of our knowledge that it always has some
content and is related in one way or another "to the o~
ject!' Instead of 110bjekt," Kant often uses the word
"Gegenstarul."
In order to understand, in their inner connection. these
three emphasized determinations of knowledge as human,
and to grasp from this Kant's ensuing expositions about
the principles, it is necessary to present as concisely as
possible Kant's basic interpretation of human knowledge
as it becomes clear for the first time in the Critique of
Pure Reason.
b. Intuition and Thought as the Two Essential
Components of Knowledge
In full consciousness of the scope of the definitions that
he has to offer, Kant places at the beginning of his work
the proposition which~ according to his interpretation,
circumscribes the essence of human knowledge. "In whatever
manner and by whatever,means a mode of knowledge
may relate to objects, intuition is that through which it
is in immediate relation to them, and to which all thought
as a means is directed. But intuition takes place only insofar
as the object is given to us. This again is only pQssible,
to man at least, insofar as the mind is affected in a certain
way." (A 19, B 33, N.K.S., p, 65.)
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 135
Tbis essential definition of knowledge is the first and
comp,Jetely decisive blow against rational metaphysics.
With it Kant moved into a new fundamental position of
man lin the midst of what is, or more precisely he lifted a
positiion, which, at bottom, had always existed, into explicit
metaphysical knowledge and laid a basis for it. That
his cc•ncem is with human knowledge is further especially
emphasized in the addition to the second edition: "to man
at lea.st." Human knowledge is representational relating
of itst~lf to·objects. But this representing is not mere thinking
irl concepts and judgments, but-and this is emphasized
by italics and by the construction of the whole
sente.nce-"intuition,. (die Anschauung ). The really sustaining
and immediate relation to the object is intuition.
It is true that intuition alone as little constitutes the
essence .of our knowledge as does mere thought: but
thou~tht belongs to intuition and in such a way that it
stands in the service of intuition. Human knowledge is
conce~ptual, judgment-forming intuition. Human knowl·
edge ~is thus a uniquely constructed u.n~ty of intuition and
thoue~ Again and again throughout the whole work
Kant emphasizes this essential definition of human
knowledge. As an example, we can quote passage B 406t
which first appears in the second edition where otherwise
precisely a sharper emphasis on the role of thought in
knowing makes itself felt. "I do not know an object
merely in that I think" (this is spoken against rational
metaphysics), "but only in so far as I determine a given
intuition with respect to the unity of consciousness in
which aU thought consists... (N.K.S., p. 368.) Passages
A 719 •. B 747 express the same: "AU our knowledge relates.
finally, to possible intuitions, for it is through them alone
that am object is given." (N.K.S •• p. 581.) In the order of
the t:ssential structure of knowledge this "finally"
amounts to ,_first/' in the first place.
Human cognition is in itself twofold. That is evident
from the doubleneSS" (Zwiefalt) of its structural elements.
They 1arc here called i11tuition and thought. But just as es136
WHAT IS A THING?
sential as this doubleness in contrast with singleness is
how this doubleness is structured. Insofar as only the
unity of intuition and thought results in a human knowledge,
obviously these two permanent parts must bear
some relation (Verwandtschaft) and have something in
common ( Gemeinsamkeit) in order to be unitable. This
is that both intuition and thought are 41representations''
(Vorstellungen). Re-present (Vor.stellen) means to put
something before oneself and to have it before one, as the
subject to have something present toward Qneself and
back onto oneself (etwas auf siclz als das Subject zu, auf
sich zud.ick, priisent haben: re-praesentare ). But how are
intuition and thought distinguished as modes of representing
within tbe common character of representing? We
can now only provisionally clarify this: '•This blackboard"
-with that we address something that stands before us
and is presented to us (uns vorgestellt ist). What is thereby
represented is thus this. certain fiat extension with this
coloring and in this light and of this hardness and material,
etc.
What we have just enumerated is immediately given to
us. We see and touch all this without more ado. We see
and feel always precisely this extension, this hue, this
lighting. The immediately represented is always "this,"
just that particular one which is just so and so. A representing
that is immediate and therefore presents always
just this particular one is intuiting. This essence of
intuition becomes clearer in contrast with the other mode
of representing, i.e., thought. Thought is not immediate,
but mediate representing. What thought intends representatiQnallyisnot
the single''this,"but just the universal.
If I say "blackboard," the intuitively given is-grasped and
conceived as a blackboard. "Blackboard"-with that I
represent something that is valid also for others, corresponding
other givens in other classrooms. The .representation
of what is valid for many, and just as such a multivalid
one, is the representation of something general. This
Kant'•s Manner of Asking About the Tld•2g 137
universal one. which is common to all that belongs to it,
is a concept (Begriff). Thought is the representation of
something in general, i.e.J in concepts. However, concepts
are not immediately found in advance ( vor-gefunde.n ). /i
certain way and means is necessary to form them. Therefore,
thinkinu is mediate representing.
c. The Twc•fold Determination of the Object in .Kant
What has been. said also makes clear that not only is
knowing (E,·kennen) twofold, but that the knowable
( Erkennbare 1t,. the possible object ( Gegenstand) of knowledge,
must also be determined in a twofold way in ·order
to be an objec::t at all. We can clarify the facts of this case
by examinini,. the word Gegenstand. What we are supposed
to be able to know must encounter us from somewhere,
come to meet us. Thus the "gegen" (against ):!T in
Gegenstand. 1But not just anything at aU that happens to
strike us (any passing visual or auditory sensation, any
sensation of pressure or warmth) is already an object
(Gegenstand). What encounters us must be determined
as standing, ~,omething which has a stand and is, therefore,
constant ( bestilndig ).2 " Nevertheless, this only gives
us a preliminary indication of the fact that the object
must obviously also be determined in a twofold way. But
it has not yet been said exactly what an object of human
knowledge tnJly is in the sense of Kant's concept of knowledge.
An object in the strict sense of Kant is neither what
is only senS4~d (Empfundene) nor what is perceived
(Wahrge.nom.mene). For example, if I point to the sun and
address it as 1the sun, this thus named and intended is not
the object (in the sense of .,object of knowledge") in the
:!TGegcm: "Against," also means .. toward," .,in tbe direction
Of/" ''opposite t~o, .. ••in the presence of," etc. l..iterally, Gegenstand
means ''standing against." Trans.
:!K "Das Begegnende muss bestimmt sein als stebend, als etwas.
das Stand hat und so besUindig isL" Trans.
138 WHATIS ATHING?
strict Kantian sense, any more than the rock to which I
point or the blackboard. Even if we go further and make
some assertions abaut the rock and the blackboard, we do
not penetrate into the objective in the strict Kantian
sense. Likewise, if with reference to the given we repeatedly
ascertain something, we still have not reached the
comprehension of the object. We can, for instance, on the
basis of repeated observations, say: When the sun shines
on the rock it becomes warm. Here, indeed, are the given.
the sun, sunshine, rock, warmth, and these are determined
in a certain judgment-like way, i.e., sunshine and warmth
of the rock are brought into relation. But the question is:
In what relation? We say more clearly: Every time the
sun shines, the rock becomes wann; every time I have a
perception of the sun there follows in me after this perception
of mine, the perception of the warm stone. This being
together of the representations of sun and rock in the
assertion .,every time when •.. then," is simply a uniting
of various perceptions,_!z., a perceptual jud£:~-t. Here
my perceptions (as also those of every o er perceiving
"I'') are always added to one an()ther. This only
determines how what is presently given to me app~rs
tome.
If I say by contrast, "Because the sun shines, the rock
will therefore become warm," then I express a cognition.
The sun is now represented as the cause and tbeli"ecomlrig
warm of the rock as the effect. We could also express this
knowledge in the sentence "The sun warms the rock." Sun
and rock are now joined not simply on the basis of the
subjectively ascertainable succession of the perceptions,
but they are grasped in the universal concepts of cause and
effect in themselves as they stand in themselves and to
one another. Now an object ( Gegen-stand) is grasped. The
relation is no longer "every time when ... then"; this refers
to the succession of perceptions. The relation is now
that of "If ... then," {"because ..• therefore"). It refers
to the fact (Sache) itself, whether I presently perceive it
Ka~nt's Manner of Asking About the Thing 139
or not. Thi~s relation is now posited as necessary. What this
judgment ~;ays is valid at all times and for ~veryone; it is
not subjective but is true of the object (Objekt), of the
object ( Ge,genstand) as such.
What encounters us in sensation and perception and is
intuitively given-the sun and sunshine, rock and warmth
-this .,agslinst" (gegen) only comes to the position of a
state of aO:airs standing in itself when the given has already
been. represented universally and thought in such
concepts a:s cause and effect, i.e., under the principle of
causality i.J1 general. The permanent elements (Bestandstiicke)
of knowing, intuition, and concept, must be unified
in a dt~tenninate way. The intuitively given must be
brought under the universality of definite concepts. The
concept must get over the intuition and must determinE; in
a conceptu1al manner what is given in the intuition. With
regard to tlbe example. i.e., fundamentally~ we must note
the following:
The pe1rceptual judgment (Wahrnehmungsurteil),
"every tim4! when .•. then," does not gradually change
over after a. sufficient number of observations, into the experiential
jjudgment (Erfahrungsurreil), "if .•. then."
This is just as impossible as it is out of the question for a
when ever to change into an if and a then to change into a
therefore, 1md vice versa.
The experiential judgment demands in itself a new
stt.,, anoJbJer way of repre~g the given, that is, in the
concept. This essentially different representation of the
given, its BJ,prehensioll as n_!l.ture, first makes possible for
obscrvatiollls to be taken as possible instances of experiential
judg.nents, so that now, in the 1ight' of the experiential
judgment the conditions· of observation may be
\'aried and the corresponding consequences of these var·
icd conditic,ns may be investigated. What we call hypothesis
in science is the first step toward an essentially different,
conceptual representing as over against mere
perception$.Experiencedoesnotarise"empirically"outof
140 WHAT IS A THING?
perception but becomes possible only through metaphysics:
through a new conceptual representing peculiarly in
advance of the given in the concepts of cause-effect. By
this means a ground for the given is established: principles.
An object in the strict sense of Kant is thus first of
all the reprcsen ted, wherein the given is determined in a
necessary and universal way. Such a representation is human
knowledge proper. Kant calls it experience (Erfahrung).
Now, summarizing Kant•s basic interpretation of
knowledge, we say:
l. Knowledge for Kant is human knowledge.
2. Human knowledge is essentially experience.
3. Experience realizes itself in the form of mathematical-
physical science.
4. Kant sees this science and with it the essence of real
human knowledge in the historical form of Newtonian
physics, which today one still calls "classical."
d. Sensibility and Understanding. Receptivity and
Spontaneity
What we have said about human knowledge up to now
should, to begin with, make the duality in its essential
structure recognizable without presenting this structure
in its innermost framework. Together with the duality of
knowledge arose an initial understanding of the duality of
the object. The mere intuitive "against" (gegen) is not
yet an object (.Gegenstand): but what is only conceptually
thought in general, as something constant, is not yet an
object either.
This also makes it clear what the words ''content of
kno\vledge" and "relation to the object" mean in the first
sentence of this section. The 41Content" is always determined
by what (and as what) is intuitively given: light,
wannth, pressure (touch), color, sound. The "relation to
the object" (Objekt), i.e., to the object (Gegenstand) ·as
such, consists in the Fact that something intuitively given
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 141
has been b1rought to stand in the generality and unity of a
concept (cause-effect). But we must carefully note that it
is always ~;omething intuitive that is brought to stand.
Conceptual pre-senting here takes on an essentially
sharpened sense.
Therefore, when Kant stresses repeatedly: Through the
intuition the object is given. thrpugh the concept the object
is thought, the misunderstanding easily suggests it·
self that tbe given is already the object, .or that the object
is an objec:t only through the concept. Both are equally
wrong. Rather, it is true that the object stands only when
the intuitio•n is thought conceptually. and the object only
confronts lJS if the concept designates something intuitively
given. Consequently, Kant uses the term "object"
in a narro,w and proper sense, and in a wider and im·
proper sen:se.
The object proper is only what is represented in experience
as experienced. The improper object is every thing to
which a representation as such refers-be it intuition or
thought. Object in the wider sense is both what we have
merely thought as such and what is only given in perception
and se!n·sation. Although in every case Kant is sure of
what he means by "object," there is in this fluent usage an
indication that Kant has broached and decided the question
of huntan knowledge and its truth only in a certain
respect. Kant bas disregarded wbat is roAQifest (das
Offen.b.4rA). He does not inquire into and detennine in its
own essence that which encounters us prior to an objectification
(lfergegenstiindlichung) into an object of experience.
Insofar as he apparently must return to this domain,
as in the di-stinction of mere perception from experience,
the procedure of comparing is always from experience to
P\!rception. This means that perception is seen from expcrience,
al1ld in relation to it, as a "not yet." However, it is
just as. important, above all. to show what experience is no
longer, as s•cientific knowledge, in comparison to perception,
in the :sense of pre-scientific knowledge. For Kant, in
142 WHAT IS A THING?
view of rational metaphysics and its claims, this alone was
decisive:
(1) To assert, in general, the intuitive (sensory) .character
of human knowledge as a fundamental component
of its essence. (2) On the basis of this altered definition, to
also determine anew the essence of the second component,
thought and concepts.
Now we can characterize still more clearly the twofold
character of human knowledge, and in different respects.
Up to now we called the two different elements intuition
and concept. The former was the immediately represented
particular and the latter the mediately represented universal.
The always different representations actually take
place in correspondingly different behavior and performance
of the human being. In intuition what is represented
is pre·sented as object, i.e., the representing is a having
before oneself what encounters. Insofar as it is to be
taken as something, encountering it becomes what is
taken up and in (auf- und.hingenomm.en). The character
of behavior in the intuition is that of taking-in (Hinnehmen),
a reception, recipere•receptio, receptivity. In
contrast, behavior in the conceptual representation is such
that the representing from itself compares what is variously
given, and in comparing refers them to one and the
same and seizes this as such. In comparing spruce--beachoak
.. birch we bring out, seize, and determine what these
have in common as one and the same thing: "tree.'' The
representing of this universal as sucb must unfold itself
from out of itself and bring what is to be represented before
itself. Because of this "from itself;' character, thinking-
as representing in concepts-is spontaneous, spontaneity.
Human intuition is never able to create what is to be
viewed, the object itself,. through the achievement of its
intuiting as such. At most such is possible in a kind of
imagination or fantasy. But in this the object itself is provided
and viewed not as one that is (Seiender), but as
Kan·t's Manner of Asking About the Thin.g 143
imagined. Human looking (Schauen).is intuiting or looking
at (An-s:chatten),:!U i.e., a view directed toward something
already given.
Because human intuition depends upon something
viewable giV'eD to it, the given must indicate itself. It must
be able to announce itself. This happens through the
sense orgam;. By means of these organs, our senses, such
as sight, heJ:tring, etc., are •fstirred" (geriihrt), as Kant
says. Something is done to them; they are approached.
That which so attracts us and bow the attraction is initiated
is sensation as affectioQ.. By contrast. in thought. in
the concept, what is represented is such that we ourselves
fashion and prepare it in its form. f•In its fonn"-this
means the h·~ in which what is thought (das·Gedachte},
what is con1ceptually represented, is something represented,
namely, 1n the how of the nnjversal On the con ..
trary, the wl'Ult, e.g., the "tree-like," must be given in its
content.· The· execution and preparation of the concept is
called function.
Hmnan intuition is necessarily sensuous, i.e., such that
the immediaLtely represented must be given to it. Since
human intui1tion depends upon su~ giving ( Gebung), i.e,
is sensuous, therefore it requires the sense organs. Thus,
we have eyes and ears because our intuiting is a seeing and
a hearing, ettc. It is not because we have eyes that we see,
nor do we hear because we have ears. Sensibility (Sinn·
lichkeit) is the capacity for human intuition. The capacity
of thought, however, wherein the object as object (der
Gegenstand 'lis Gegenstand) is brought to stand, is under.-.
tanding. We! can now clearly arrange in order the differ~
nr definitiotts of the twofoldness of human knowledge
and also lay down the various respects in which, at any
given time, these distinctions determine human knowledge:
Intuition--Concept (thought): the represented as
such in the olbject.
- .:!A See note 2~3. Trans.
144 WHAT IS A THING?
Receptivity-Spontaneity: modes of behaving in the
representing.
Affection-Function: the character of event and result
of the represented.
Sensibility-Understanding: representing as the capacities
of the human mind, as sources of knowledge.
Depending on the context, Kant uses these different
forms of the two essential elements.
e. The Apparent Superiority of Thought;
Pure Understanding Related to Pure lntuitiorr
With the interpretation of the Critique of Pure Reason
and the explanation of Kant's philosophy in general, one
cannot escape from the fact that, according to his doctrine,
knowledge is composed of intuition and thought.
But from this general statement it is still a long way to a
real understanding of the role of these elements :and the
character of their unity~ and above all to the correct
evaluation of this essential definition of human knowledge.
In the Critique of Pure Reason, where Kant takes up the
"most difticult task" of analyzing experience in its es.
sential structure, the discussion of thought and the acts of
understanding, those of the second component, not only
occupy a disproportionately greater space, but the whole
direction of the inquiry of this analysis of the essence of
experience is aimed at the characterization of thought
whose proper action we already have met as judgment.
The doctrine of intuition, a'/.a8,a'&~, is the aesthetics. (Com·
pare A 21, B 35, note.) The doctrine of thought, of judgment,
A&yo,, is logic. The doctrine of intuition .includes
A 19-A 49, i.e., thirty pages; B 33-B 73. i.e., forty pages.
The doctrine of thought, A 50, B 14-A 704, B 132, takes up
more than 650 pages.
The priority in the treatment of logic, its dispropor·
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 145
tionatel:y greater extent within the whole work, is obvious.
Also we can repeatedly ascertain in particular sections
that the question of judgment and concept, thus the question
of thought, s·tands in the foreground. We can also
easily n~ognize this fact in the section upon which we
based our interpretation and which we designated as the
very cen.ter of the work. The headings say clearly enough
that it i:s a question of judgments. The discussion is expressly
about ,\6yov (reason) in the title of the whole work.
On the basis of this obvious ·priority of logic, people have
almost universally concluded that Kant sees the true essence
of knowledge in thought, in judging. This opinion .
was sup,ported by the traditional and ancient doctrine
accordilllg to which judgment and assertion are the place
of truth· and falsity. Truth is the basic characteristic of
knowledge. !fherefore, the question about .knowledge is
nothing more than the question about judgment, and the
interpre:tation of Kant must therefore begin at this decisive
poitat.
How far this prejudice has prevented penetrating
into the c::enter of the work cannot and need not be further
reported. here. But it is important for the correct appropriation
of this work to keep these facts continuously in
mind. Generally, the neo-Kantian interpretation of the 1
Critique of Pure Reason leads to a depreciation of intuition
as the basic component of human knowledge. The
Marburg school's interpretation of Kanteven went so far
as to eliminate altogether from the Cri-tique of Pure
Reason intuition as a foreign body. The downgrading of
intuition had the consequence that the question of the
unity of both components, intuition and thinking-or.
more exatctly, the question of the ground of the pos·sibility
of their unification-took a wrong turn .. if it was ever seriously
aLsked at all. All these misinterpretations of the
Critiq11e of Pure Reason as they still circulate in differing
variatio11ts today have caused the importance of this work
146 WHATIS ATHING?
for its essential inherent and single question, concerning
the possibility of a metaphysics, to be neither properly
evaluated nor, above all, to be made creatively fruitful.
But how can it be explained that in spite of the f~ndamental
and authoritative significance of intuition in human
knowledge Kant himself places the main problem of
the analysis of knowledge into the discussion of thought?
The reason is as simple as it is obvious. Precisely because
Kant-contrary to rational metaphysics, which put the
essence of knowledge into pure reason and into mere conceptual
thought-posits intuition as the supporting fundamental
moment of human knowledge, thought must
now be deprived of its former presumed superiority and
exclusive validity. But the Critique could not be content
with the neg~tive task of disputing the preswnption of
conceptual thought. It had first and foremost to defin~
and ground anew the essence of thought.
The extended discussion of thought and concept in the
Critique of Pure Reason indicates no downgrading. of intuition.
On the contrary. this discussion of concept and
judgment is the clearest proof that from now on intuition
will remain the authority without which thought is
nothing. ·
The extensive treatment of the one component of
knowledge_ of thought. is stressed even more in the second
edition. In fact, it often looks as if the question of the
essence of knowledge were exclusively a question of the
judgment and its conditions. However, the priority of the
question of judgment does not have its ground in the fact
that the essence of knowledge really is judgment, but in
the fact that the essence of judgment must be defined
anew, because it is now conceived as a representation related
in advance to intuition. i.e., to the object.
The priority of logic, the detailed treatment of thought,
is therefore necess;;u-y, because thought in its essence does
not have priority over intuition, but, rather, is based
upon intuition and is always related to it. The priority of
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 147
logic in the Critique of Pure Reason has its ground solely
in the n:on-priority of the object of logic, i.e., in placing
thought into the service of intuition. if correct thought is
always based on intuition, then the proper logic belonging
to this thought necessarily and precisely deals with this
essential relation to intuition. consequently with intuition
itself. T:he modest extent of the aesthetic-as the initial
separate~ doctrine of intuition-is only an outward ap.
pearanc•e. Since the aesthetic is now decisive, i.e., every·
where plays an authoritative part. therefore it makes so
much w•:>rk for logic. For this reason logic must turn out
so exten:sive.
It is innportant to note this, not only for the overall com·
prehensjlon of the Critique of Pure Reason as such, but,
above all, for the interpretation of our chapter. For the
titles of our first two sections, as well as the first sentence
of Section I, read as though the question about human.
knc•wledge and its principles. simply slips off· into a
question about judgments. about mere thought. However,
we shall see'.that exactly the contrary is the case. With a
certain E~ggeration we can even say that the question
of thepr:ineiples of the pure understanding is the question
of the necessary role of intuition, which necessQ.rily is the
basis fo,. the pure understanding. This intuition must itself
be a pure one.
uPure" means "mere,. (bloss), "unencumbered"
(ledig), '"being free from something else"; in this case,
''free from sensation." Looked at negatively, pure intuition
is free of sensation, although it is an intuition that
belongs to the sphere of sensibility. •'Pure" therefore
means what is based only upon itself and existing first.
This pur':: intuition, presented in an immediate representation,
free of sensation, this single and only one, is time.
Pure understanding means, in the first place. mere under·
standing detached from intuition. But because understanding
as such relates to intuition, the determination
'•pure understanding" can only mean understanding based
,,
148 WHATIS ATHING?
on intuition and. indeed. on pure intuition. The same i~
true concerning the title "pure reason~'' it is equivocal.
Pre-critically it means mere reason. Critically, i.e., limited
to its essence, it means reason which is essentially.
grounded ii1 pure intuition and sensibility. The critique
of pure reason is at once the delimitation of this reason
which is founded upon pure intuition and, at the same
time, the rejection of pure· reason as "mere'' reason.
f. Logic and Judgment in Kant
The insight into these relationships, i.e., the acquisition
of the essential concept of a 4)rure understanding," is,
however, the pre-condition for the understanding of the
third sectio~t.which is supposed to present the systematic
struc·ture of pure understanding.
The clarification of the essence of human knowledge we.
have just carried out enables us to read the first sentence
of our section with a d.ifferent eye than at the beginning.
"The universal. though merely negative, condition of all
our judgments in general. whatever be the content of our
knowledge, and however it may relate to the object, is
that they be not self-contradictory; for if self..contradic·
tory, these judgments are in themselves, even without
reference to the object, null and void." (A 150. B 189t
N.K.S., p 189.) We realize that our knowledge is here im·
mediately examined in a certain respect. namely, in terms
of the second essential component of knowing. the act of
thought, the judgment. More precisely it is said here that
freedom from contradiction is the "condition, though
merely negative, of all our judgments in general." This is
said of "all our judgments in general." -and not yet Qf
"analytic judgments," which are set forth as the therne
in the title. Furthermore, he speaks of "a merely nega·
tive condition," and not about a highest principle
(Grund). It is true that the text speaks of contradiction
and of judgments in general, but not yet of the principle of
Kan1t's Manner of Asking About the Thing 149
contradictio111 as the highest principle of all analytic judgments.
Kant here considers judgment as before its differentiation
:into analytic and synthetic judgments.
In what J"tespect is judgment viewed here? What is a
judgment? Elow does Kant define the essence of the judgment?
The CJlUestion sounds simple enough, and yet the
inquiry immediately becomes complicated. For we know
that judging is the function of thought. Thought has experienced
a D1ew characterization through Kant's essential
definition of human knowledge: It enters essentially into
the service ofr intuition. Therefore, the same must also be
valid for the act of thought of the judgmentp Now one
could say that through stressing the subservience of
thought and judgment only a particular purpose (Abzweckung)
of thought has been introduced. Thought itself
and its determination have not been thereby essentially
touched. On the contrary, the essence of thought (judgment)
must already be defined, in order for thought to
enter into this subservient position.
The essenc:e of thought, i.e., the judgment, bas, since
ancient tim~;, been determined by logic. Altbo~gb Kant
did determine a new conception of knowledge along the
lines we discussed, he could only add to the current definition
of the esisence of thought {judging) the further one
that thought stands in the service of intuition. He could
take over unc:hanged the logic of the existing doctrine of
thought in order to supplement the addition that logic, if
it deals with human knowledge, must always stress that
thought must be related to intuition.
In fact, this is how Kant's position looks with respect to
traditionallolgic and thereby also toward its essential definition
of jud1gment. What is still more important, Kant
himself frequently viewed and presented the situation in
this way. Only slowly and with great difficulty did he come
to recognize 1that his discovery of the peculiar subservience
of thought might be more than just an additional
definition of it; that, on the contrary, with it the essential
150 WHATIS ATHING?
definition of thought and thus of logic changes basically.
There is a saying of Kant about logic which is often
quoted, though understood in an opposite and. therefore,
false sense. This saying testifies to his sure presentiment
of this revolution which he had initiated. It is no accident
that it occurs only in the second edition: uThat logic has
already,from the earliest times; proceeded upon this sure
path is evidenced by the fact that since Aristotle it has not
required to retrace a single step, unless, indeed, we care to
count as improvements the removal of certain needless
subtleties or the clearer exposition of its recognised·
teaching, features which concern the elegance rather than
the certainty·of the science. It is remarkable also that to
the present day this logic has not been able to advance a
single step, and is thus to aU appearance a closed and completed
body of doctrine.'' (B viii, N.K.S., p. 17.) Roughly
speaking, this means that from now on this appearance
I,\ proves itself to be void. Logic is to be newly founded and
transfonned.
In certain places Kant has clearly arrived at this insight,
but he has not developed it. That would have lileant
nothing less than to construct metaphysics upon the
ground which had been cleared 'by the Critique of Pure
Reason. Such, however, was not Kant's intention, since to
him "critique" (in the specified sense} had to be first and
alone essential. It also did not lie within Kant's capacity,
because· such a task exceeds eve-n the capacity of a great
thinker. It demands nothing less than to jump over one's
own shadow .. No ·one can do this. However, the greatest
effort in attempting this impossibility-that is the decisive
ground-movement of the action of thought. We experience
something of this fundament~} movement in quite dlf·
ferent ways in Plato, Leibniz, and, above aU, in Kant and
later in Schelling and Nietzsche. Hegel alone apparently
succeeded in jumping over this shadow, but only in such
a way that he eliminated the shadow, i.e., the finiteness of
man, and jumped into the sun itself. Hegel skipped over
Kan.t's Manner of Asking About the Thing 151
( Uberspring~!n) the shadow. but he did not, because of
that, surpas!; the shadow (uber den Schatten ). Neverth~
Jess, every philosopher must want to do this. This
"must" is his vocation. The longer the shadow, the wider
the jump. This has nothing to do with a psychology
of the creative personality. It ·concerns only the form
of motion bE~longing to the work itself as it works itself
out in him.
Kant's attitude toward such an apparently dry ques·
tion, "What i:s the essence of the judgment?" reveals something
of this fundamental movement. The relation of the
first to the SE:cond edition of the Critique of Pure Reason
shows how difficult it was for Kant to establish in its
whole range ;an adequate essential definition of judgment
from out of his new conception of knowledge. In terms of
content all dc:dsive insights had been achieved in the first
edition. Yet only in the second edition does Kant succeed
in bringing forward, at the decisive spot, that essential
delineation ()f judgment which accords with his own
fundamental position.
Kant stres:ses again and again the fundamental importance
of the n.ewly proposed distinction of judgments into
analytic and. synthetic. This means nothing other than
that the essence of judgment as such bas been newly defined.
The distinction is only a necessary consequence of
this essential definition, and, retrospectively. at the same
time, a method for designating the newly conceived essence
of the judgment.
We must take all that has been said into account, in
order not to take too lightly the question: "According to
Kant, of what does the essence of judgment consist?" and
so that we arc! not surprised if we cannot find our way uniformly
throu:gh his definitions without further ado. For
Kant has no\\,here developed a systematic description of
his essential definition of judgment on the basis of the in·
sights at whic:h he himself arrived. Certainly this is not
developed irr his lecture on logic which has been handed
152 WHAT IS A THING?
down to us, where, if anywhere, one would expect to find
it.ln general, this lecture must be consulted cautiously because
( 1 ) lecture notebooks and notes are, at any rate, a
questionable matter, especially in the sections which discuss
difficult things; and (2) in his lectures, Kant pur·
posely adhered to the traditional doctrines and took their
scholarly traditional order and presentation as his guide.
Thus he was not guided, in these notes, by the inner system
of the subject matter itself as it presented itself in his
thought. Kant chose as the textbook in his logic lectures
the Auszug aus der Vernunftlehre., a schoolbook whose
author,Meier (1718-1777), was a student of Baumgarten,
the aforementioned student of Wolff.
With this reading of the treatment of the question of the
judgment by Kant, we are compelled, in the most exact
conformity with Kant, to give a ·systematically freer, but
short, presentation of his essential definition of judgment.
According to what has been said, this will automatically
lead to a clarification of the decisive distinction between
an~lytic and synthetic judgments.
The question "Of what does judgment consist?" can
be posed in two respects: first, in the direction of the traditional
definition of thought, and second, in the direction of
Kant's new delineation. This latter does not simply exclude
the traditional characteristics of judgment, but includes
them into the essential structure of judgment. This
indicates that this essential structure is not as simple as
the pre·Kantian logic thought it was, and as one views it
again today-in spite of Kant. The intrinsic basis for the
difficulty in seeing the whole essence of judgment does not
lie in the incompleteness of Kant's system, but in the es·
sential structure of judgment itself~
At this point we should remember that we have already
schematically indicated the organized structure of the
judgment when we showed (supra, pp. 35-38) ho~
far since Aristotle and Plato >.oyM, i.e., the assertion, has
been the guide for the definition of the thing. We did this
Kt:irnt's Manner of Asking About the Thing 153
with the aid of the (oyrfold meaning of "assertion." What
we only touched on there now finds its essential elabora·
tion in a short systematic presentation of Kant's essential
definition of judgment.
5. Kant's Essential Definition of the Judgment
a. 'The Traditional Doctrine of Judgment
We begimwith the traditional doctrine of judgment. The
differences and changes that ap·pear in its history must be
left aside. We recall only Aristotle's general definition of
the assertion (judgment), Adyo~: M'fWI n I(G.'rU """"·
14tO say
something about something": praedicere. Therefore, to
assert is to relate a predicate to a subject-'' The board is
black." Kant expresses this universal characteristic of
judgment in such a way that, at the beginning of the iJn ..
portant se<:tion "The Distinction between Analytic and
Synthetic Judgments" (Introduction, A· 6, B 10, N.K.S.,
p. 48), he remarks that in judgments "the relation of a
subject to ·the predicate is thought.'' The judgment is a
relation in which and through which the predicate is attributed
to or denied of the subject. Accordingly, we have
either attrilbutive, affirmative, or denying, negative judgments.
"Thiis board is not red." It is important to keep in
view that \\tithout exeeption, since Aristotle, and also in
Kant, the silmple affirmative (and true) assertion has been
posited as the standard fundamental form of all judging.
Corresponding to the tradition, Kant says of the judgment
that ii:a it "the relation of a subject to the predicate is
thought." lnt general, this statement proves true. However,
the question remains whether this exhausts the essence of
judgment, a1nd whether the heart of the matter is under~
tood. As tof Kant. the question arises whether he would
admit that the cited characteristic of judgment he himself
applied had hit upon its essence. Kant would not admit
that. On tlu~ other hand, it is not clear what should be
added to thet essential definition of judgment. In the end it
154 WHAT IS A THING?
is also unnecessary to add further determinations. On the
contrary, we must note the opposite, that the given definition
omits essential moments of the judgment, so that lt is
only a question of seeing how in precisely the given defi-:
nition there lie indications of the essential moments.
In order that we may take Kant's new step with and
after him, it is advisable, first, to cite briefly the view of
judgment that prevailed in his time. and to which he paid
attention. For this purpose we choose the definition of
judgment given by Wolff in his large "Logic." In §39 we
read: "Actus iste mentis, quo aliquid are quadam diver·.
sum eidem tribuimus, vel ab ea removemus, iudicium appellature."
("That action of mind by which we attribute
to a certain thing something which is different from ittribuer
[n.T~·~l-or hold away from it-removere
[clw~atrw]-is called judgntent [iudicium] ... ) Accordingly,
§40 asserts: "D\lm ·ighur mens iudicat, notiones duas vel
coniungit, vel separat~" ("When [as] the mind judges, it
either connects or separates two concepts.") In accordance
§201 notes: "In enunciatione seu propositione no.
tiones vel coniunguntur, vel separantur." ("In a propositio~
tt or sentence, concepts are either bound or separated.")
A student of a student of this master of conceptual analysis,
Professor Meier defines it as follows in his Auszug
aus der Vernunftlehre, §292: "A judgment (iudicium) is a
representation of a logical relation of several concepts!'
It is particuJarly "logical,. that in this definition Logos is
defined as a representation of a logical relation. However,
aside from this, the textbook used by Kant only reproduces
the definition of Wolff ina trite way. Thus, judgment
is "the representation of a relation between several co~
cepts!'
b. Tbe Insufficiency of the Traditional Doctrine; Logistics
We first contrast this definition of judgment from the
Scholastic philosophy with Kant's definition that most
Kant''s Manner of Asking About the Thing JSS
sharply expre:sses the greatest diJference. It is found in the
second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason in conne»
tion with a se•ction that Kant thoroughly reworked for the
second editio:n, eliminating obscurities without changing
anything of the fundamental position. It is the section on
the "TransceJ!ldental Deduction of the Pure Concepts of
Understanding.'' The essential definition of the judgment
is found in §19 (B 140, N.K.S., p. 158). The paragraph begins
with the words: "I have never been able to accept the
interpretation which logicians give of judgment in general.
lt is, tbt~y declare, the representation of a relation
between two concepts." "Interpretation" (Erkliirung)
means to make something clear, not to derive something
causally. What Kant here rejects as inadequate is just the
definition of 1\teier, i.e., of Baumgarten and Wolff. What is
meant is the d,efinition of judgment as an assertion, familiar
in logic sin1ce Aristotle, My1w "' ""4 "•roc. However, Kant
does not say that this definition is false. He merely states
that it is unsa1tisfactory. He himself makes use of this defi·
nition of jucf&:ment, and still uses it several times in the
period after publishing his Critique of Pure ReClSon, even
after the sec•ond edition. In investigations carried on
around the }'lear 1790, Kant says: "The understanding
shows its capacity only in judgments, which are nothing
other than the unity of consciousness in the relation of
concepts in gc:meral. ("Fortschritte der Metaphysik," K.
Vorlander, ed., p. 97.) Where a relation is represented, a
unity is always represented which supports the relation
and becomes c:onscious through the relation so that what
we are conscious of in judgment has the character of a
unity. The sarne was already expressed by Aristotle (De
Aui,.,ra, 6, 430a, 27 f.): There is in judgment rro..Stalff .,.,v ..;a,
Wf"'l•ctiTUJI' CftCp ·a., 3vr411V1
118 putting together Of ObjectS Of
thought in a C(~rtain unity.'' This characterization of judg·
mcnt is valid for judgment in general. We shall use some
examples which we must employ later: "This board is
black"; "All bodies are extended"; "Some bodies are
heavy." WitholUt exception. a relation is represented here.
156 WHATJS ATHING?
Representations are connected. We find the linguistic expression
of this connection in the "is" or the "are." Therefore,
this "little relation word" (Kant) or "bond" is called
copula. The understanding, therefore, is the faculty. of
connecting representations, i.e., of representing this subject-
predicate relationship. The characterization of the
assertion as the connection of representations is correct
but unsatisfying .. This correct, but inadequate, definition
of assertion became the basis for a view and treatment of
logic which today and for a number of decades has been
much talked about and is called symbolic logic (" Logistic").
With the help of mathematical methods people attempt
to calculate the system of the connectives between
assertions. For this reason, we also call this logic ''mathe.
maticallogic." It proposes to ·itself a possible and justified
task. However, what symbolic logic achieves is anything
but logic, i.e., a reflection \!poD AOyolil •. Mathematical
logic is not even logic of mathematics in the sense of defining
mathematical thought and mathematical truth, nor
could it do so at all. Symbolic logic is itself only a mathematics
applied to propositions and propositional forms.
All mathematical logic and symbolic logic necessarily
place themselves outside of every sphere of logic, ·because.
for their very own purpose, they must apply A.iyot, the assertion,
as a mere combination of representations, i.e.,
basically inadequately. The presump.tuousness of logistic
in posing as the scientific logic of all sciences collapses as
soon as one realizes how limited and thoughtless its
premises are. It is also characteristic for-logistic to consider
everything that reaches beyond its own definition of
assertion as a connection of representations, as a matter
of "finer distinctions" which don't concern it. But here it
is .not a question of fine or gross distinctions. but only
this: Whether or not the essence of the judgment has been
hit upon.
When Kant says tha.t the cited "interpretation'' of judgment
in Scholastic logic is unsatisfying, this dissatisfacKtlnt's
Manner of Asking About the Thing J 57
tion is not simply a personal one in regard to his own
particular wishes. On the contrary, this interpretation
does not satisfy those demands which come from the
essence of the situation itself.
c. 'The Relation of the Judgment to Object
and Intuition. Apperception
What is Kant's new definition of judgment? Kant said
(B 141, cited above) "that a judgment is nothing but the
manner in which given modes of knowledge are brought
to the obJective unity of apperception." We cannot yet
fully and immediately grasp this definition and its determining
e:lements (Bestimmungsstucke ). Meanwhile,
something: strikes the eye. The discussion is no longer of
representatiollS and concepts, but of "given cognitions,"
i.e., of the pven in knowledge, consequently, of intuitions.
He speaks of" objective unity." Here judging as an action
of understanding is not only related to intuition and
object, but its essence is defined from this relation and
even as this relation. Through the essential definition of
judgment, as it is anchored in intuition and object-relation,
this relationship is. at the very beginning, ·outlined
and expre!•sly set into the unified structure of knowledge.
From here a new concept of understanding arises. Understanding
is, now no longer merely the faculty of connecting
representa.tions, but: "Understanding is, to use general
terms, the faculty of knowledge. This knowledge consists
in the determinate relation of given representations to an
object .... " (§ 17, B 137, N.K.S., p. 156.)
We can ~clarify this new situation with a diagram. This
diagram will later serve us as a reference point when we
develop the essential distinction between analytic and
synthetic judgments from this new interpretation of
judgment.
The definition of judgment quoted earlier concerns
simply a rc:~latioll of concepts, subject and predicate. That
158 WHAT IS A THING?
the representing of such a relation demands an actus
mentis is self.evident, since some mode of action belongs
to every act of the understanding. I~ contrast with this the
new definition speaks of the objective unity of knowledge.
i.e., the unity of the intuitions, which is represented as a
Object
Objekt/Gegenstand
.3
(ich)
unity belonging to the object and determining it. This relation
of representations, as a whole, is related to objects.
Therewith, for Kant, there is also posited the relation to
the "·subject" in the sense of the I that thinks and judges.
In the essential definition of judgment, this I relation
is called .apperception. Percipere is the simple apprehen~
sion and grasping of the objective. In apperception the
relation to the I is grasped and perceived in a certain way,
along with the object. The standing-over-against (Entgegenstehen)
of the object as such is not possible unless
what enco1,1nters, in its standing-over-against, is present
for that which represents, which thereby at the same
time has itself present along with the object, although not
as an object, but only insofar as what encounters in its
againstness (Entgegen) at all demands a directed ~:elation
to that which is aware of that which encounters.
According to the way in which we have now contrasted
the two definitions of judgment, i.e., the traditional one
and Kant's, it looks as though Kant only added something
to the definition of judgment which had been omitted up
Kuut's Manner of Asking About the Tlting 159
till the1n. But it is not a question of a umere extension," but
of a more primordial grasp of the whole. Therefore, we
must begin with Kant's essential definition in order to be
able to evaluate the position of the traditional definition.
If we tnke this latter for itself, then we can clearly see that
we selt:ct one component and that this, so taken, represents
o•nly an artificial construction which has been uprooted
from the supporting basis of the relations to the
object, and to the knowing I.
Fro11n this it is easy to judge why the traditional definitions
of judgment never could satisfy Kant, i.e., put him at
peace lvith the matter itself. In regard to the question of
the possibility of metaphysics, the question concerning
the ess•ence of human knowledge had to become deci$ive
for hiiia.
To u:ndeFstand Kant's new definition of judgment more
clearly is nothing else than to clarify the aforementioned
distinc1tion between analytic and synthetic judgments. We
ask in what respect these judgJ;nents are distinguished.
What does this key respect imply for the new definition of
the nat111re of judgment?
The ,various twisted, slanted, and fruitless attempts to
come tc, terms with Kant's distinction all suffer in advance
from being based on the traditional definition of judgment,
but not ori that attained by Kant.
The distinction brings into view nothing else than the
changed conception of the Logos and all that belongs to it,
i.e., the "logical:• Up to then the essence of the logical was
seen in the connection and relation of concepts. Kant's
new definition of the logical, contrasted with the traditional
one, is something absolutely strange and almost
nonsen:sical, insofar as it asserts that the logical precisely
does nort just consist in this mere relation of concepts. Obviously
with full knowledge of the scope of his new definition
of the logical, Kant put it into the title of that important
§l~J: "'The Logical Form of All Judgments Consists in
the Objective Unity of the Apperception of the Concepts
)
l60 WHAT IS A THING?
Which They Contain." To read this as a methodical guide
means that all discussion of the essence of the judgment
must arise from the entire structure of judgment ai it is
established, in advance, from the relations to the object
and to the knowing human.
d. Kant's Distinction Between Analytic and
Synthetic Judgments
What is the purpose of the distinction between analytic
and synthetic judgments? In what respect does its clJLri·
fication give us a more fulfilled insight into the nature "Of
judgment? Hitherto we know only that this distinction
directs the division betWeen the first two sections of our
chapter. We cannot get much from the names. Pursuing
them we can easily fall into error, mostly because the
designated distinct-ion can also be met in the traditional
definition of judgment and had already been applied even
at the time of its first formatio.o by Aristotle. Analytic
means analysis, dissolving, taking, apart, B.lpww; synthesis,
on the other hand, means putting together ..
If we observe once again the view of judgment as the
relation between subject and predicate. then it immedi·
ately follows that this relation, i.e., the attributing of the
predicate to the subject~ is a synthesis, e.g., of '•board'' and
"black." On the other hand, these two relational elements
must be separated in order to be combinable. There is an
analysis in every synthesis, and vice versa. Therefore,
every judgment as a relation of representations is not only
incidentally but necessarily analytic and synthetic at the
same time. Therefore, because every judgment as such is
both analytic and synthetic~ the distinction. into analytic
and synthetic judgments is nonsensical. This reflection is
correct. However, Kant does not base his distinction upon
the nature of judgment as traditionally intended. What
analytic and synthetic mean to Kant is "not derived from
the traditional. but from the new, essential delineation
1Cant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 161
(W esensumgrentung ). In order really to see the difference
and its main point, we call upon the aid of the diagram and
of examp•les of analytic and synthetic judgments.
41All bodies are extended" is, according to Kant, an
analytic judgment. "Some bodies are heavy" (Prolego ..
mena §2a) is, according to Kant, a synthetic judgment.
With regard to these examples, one could base the difference
betvveen analytic and synthetic judgments by saying
that the ;analytic: judgment speaks of "all" bodies, while
the syntb.etic, on the contrary, speaks about "some." This
difference~ between the two judgments is certainly not accidental.
However. it does not suffice in order to grasp the
required difference. particularly not when we understand
it only in the sense of traditional logic and assert that the
.first judgment is universal and the second particular. "All
bodies'' h.ere-means ;'body in general." According to Kant~
this "in general" is represented in the concept. "All
bodies" rneans the body taken according to its concept,
with regard to what we mean at all by .,body." Taking
body ace<>rding to its concept,. according to what we represent
by it, we can and even must say that body is extended,
\\'hether it be a purely geometrical body or a material
ancl physical one. The predicate "extended'' lies in
the concept itself; a mere dissecting of the concept finds
this elemc!Dt. In the judgment "The body is extended," the
represented unity of the relation of subject and predicate,
the belon:ging together of both, has the basis of its fundamental
d•etermination in the concept of the body. If I
judge about bodies in any way at all, I must already have a
certain cc•gnition of the object in the sense of its concept.
If nothing more is asserted about the object than what
lies in th•e concept, i.e., if the truth of the judgment is
based only upon a dissection of the concept of the subject
as such. then this judgment is an analytic one. The
ta"Uth of the judgment rests on the analyzed concept
as such.
The following diagram clarifies the above:
1.62 WHAT IS A THING?
"Obj.
,
According to the new definition, there belongs. to the
judgment the relation to the object (x), i.e., the subject is
meant in its relation to the object. However, this relation
can now be represented in various ways. First, so that the
object is represented only insofar as it is cited in general,
in the concept.
In the concept we already have a knowledge of the object,
and by skipping the object (X), without detouring
through X, purely by remaining in the subjective concept
"bodily," we can draw the predicate out of it. Such an
analyzing judgment only presents more clearly and purely
what we already represent in the subjective ·concept.
Therefore, according to Kant, the analytic judgment is
only a clarifying one. It does not increase the content of
our knowledge. Let us take another example. The judgment
"The board is extended'' is an analytic judgment. In
the concept of the board as corporeal lies being extended.
This judgment is self-evident. i.e .• the putting .. into-relation
of subject and predicate alreadybas its ground in the con·
cept we have of a board. In contrast, if we say, "The board
is black," then our assertion is not self-evident. The board
could just as well be gray, white, or red. The }?eing red
does not already lie in the concept of a board, as being extended
does. How the board is colored, that it is black, can
be decided only from the object itself. Therefore, to reach
the grounds of the determination in which this relaiion of
subject and predicate is based, our representation has to
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 163
take another way than in the analytic judgment, namely,
the way via the object and its particular giveness.
Vh~wed from the analytic judgment this means that
we aannot stay within the subject's concept and appeal
only Ito what belongs to a board as such. We have to step
out olf the subject and pass beyond the concept and go by
way of the object itself. This, however, means that in ad- \
dition to the concept of the object, the object itself must
be represented. This additional representation (Mit-dat.uvorst.,
llen) of the object is a synthesis. Such a judgment,
when! the predicate is annexed to the subject via passage
through the X and recourse to it, is a synthetic judgment.
•'For that something outside the given concept must be
added as a substratum, which makes it possible to go beyond
my predicate, is clearly indicated by the expression
synthesis/' (Vber eine Entdeckung ... , op. cit., p. 245.)
In the sense of the traditional definition of judgment, a
predi,cate is added to the subject also in the analytic judgment.
With respect to the subject-predicate relationship
the aJnalytic judgment, too. is synthetic. Conversely, the
synthetic is also analytic. But this respect is not decisive
for I<:ant. We now see more clearly what this general
judgi1ng relationship amounts to. when it is selected in
isolation and alone alleged to be the judging relationship.
Then it is only the neutralized relation of subject and
predi•:ate which is present in general in the analytic and
synthetic judgment, but in essentially different ways.
This leveled and faded form is stamped as the essence of
judgnnent. It remains ominous that it is always right.
Now llur diagram becomes misleading insofar as it could
give t:he impression that the subject-predicate relationship
;was first and forem'ost the main support, and the
rest "'ere just accessories. .
The~ decisive respect in which analytic and synthetic
judgn11ents are distinguished is the reference of the sub- \
jec.t-predicate relationship as such to the object. If this
UbJect is only represented in its concept, and if this is
164 W t·I AT IS A T H l N G ?
posited as what is given beforehand, then the object is in
a certain sense a standard, but only as the given concept.
This concept can yield the determinations only insofar as
it is dissected, and only what is dissected and thus thrown
into relief is attributed to the object. The grounding of
the judgment takes place within the realm of the dissection
of the concept. The object is a standard in the analytic
judgment, too-but s()lely within its concept. (Compare:
... , . of that which as concept is contained and is thought
in the knowledge of the object .... " [A 151, B 190. N.K.S.,
p. 190])
But, if the object is an immediate standard for the
subject-predicate relationship, if the asserting is proven
by taking its way via the object itself, if the object itself
participates as the foundation and grounds, then the
judgment is synthetic.
The distinction classifies judgments according to the
possible difference of the basis for the determination of
the truth in the subject-predicate relationship. If the basis
for the determination is contained in. the concept as such,
then the judgment is analytic. If this basis is contained
in the object itself, then the judgment is synthetic. From
out of the object itself this judgment adds something to
the erstwhile knowledge of the object: it extends ( erweiternd).
The analytic judgment, however,. is only clarifying
( erllluternd).
It must have become clear that the above distinction
between judgments presupposes the new concept of judgment,
i.e., the relation to the objective unity of the object
itself; and that. at the same time, it serves to convey a
definite insight into the full essential structure of the
judgment. Nevertheless, we still do not see cl~arly what
the distinction into analytic and synthetic judgments has
to do with the task of the critique of pure reason. We
have defined this positively as the essential delimiting of
pure reason, i.e., what it has the power to do: negatively
Kant's Manner of Asking Aboutlhe Thing 165
put, as rejection of the presumptuousness of metaphysics
bas·ed upon mere concepts.
e. A Priori-A Posteriori
1'o what extent is the designated distinction one of
fundamental importance for the execution of the critique?
We can answer this. question just as soon as we have
characterized analytic and synthetic judgments in one
more respect, which up to now has been intentionally
pOstponed.
In the clarification of the nature of the mathematical
and in the description of the development of mathematical
t~ought in modem natural science and modem modes
of thought in general, we ran into a striking fact. For
exatnple, Newton's first principle of motion and Gallleo's
law of falling bodies both have the peculiarity that they
leapt ahead of what verification and experience. in a literal
sense, offer. In such principles, som~tbing has been anticipated
in respect to things. Such anticipations rank ahead
of a.nd precede all further determinations of .things. In_
Latin terms such anticipations are a priori rather than
anylthing else. This does not mean that in the order of the
hist•orical development of our knowledge these anticipations
as such become familiar to us first. Rather. the
anti·cipating principles are first in rank when it is a question
of grounding and constructing our knowledge in
itself. Thus a natural scientist can for a long time have
vari·ous kinds of information and knowledge of nature
without knowing the highest law of motion as such; yet
what is posited in this law is always already the ground
for ull particular assertions made in the domain of state-men
ts concerning processes of motion and their regularity.
Tlhe priority ( Prioritiit) of the a priori concerns the
l!sse.ncc of things. What enables the thing to be what it is
pre-cedes the thing as regards the facts and nature, al166
WHAT IS A THING?
though we only grasp that which precedes after taking
account of some of the most obvious qualities of the thing.
(On priorita.'t naturae, compare Leibniz' "Letter to Voider
of January 21. 1704," in Leihniz.t Gerhardt, ed., II, 263.) In
the order of explicit apprehension, what objectively precedes
.is later. The rpn-rcpo11 f/n'vu is i'rrrr,pov rp~ l,p.dfl. Because
what objectively precedes is later in the order of coming
to know, this easily again and again leads to the error
that it is also objectively something later and thus an unimportant
and basically indifferent fact. This widespread
as well as convenient opinion corresponds to a peculiar
blindness for the essence of things. and for the decisive
importance of the cognition of essence. The predominance
of such a blindness to essence is always an obstacle for a
change in knowledge and the sciences. On the other hand,
the decisive changes in human knowledge and scientific
attitude are based upon the fact that what objectively
precedes ( das sachlich Vorgiingige) can be grasped in the
right way also for inquiry as the preceding ( das Vor•
herige) and constantly as an advance projection.
The a priori is the title for the essence of things. According
to how the thingness of the thing is grasped and
the being of what is is understood, so also is the a priori
and its prioritas interpreted. We know that for modem
philosophy the l·priilciple is the first principle in the order
of precedence of truth and principles, i.e., that which is
thought in the pure thought of the I as the prime subject.
Thus it happens that, conversely, everything thought in
the pure thought of the subject holds good a priori. That
is a priori which lies ready in the subject. in the mind. The
a priori is what belongs to the subjectivity of the subject.
Everything else, on the contrary, which first becomes
accessible only by going out of the subject and entering
into the object, into perceptions, is-as seen from the
subject-later, i.e., a posteriori.
We cannot enter here into the history of this distinction
-a priori, preceding in rank, and a posteriori, correspond·
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 167
ingly later. Kant in his way takes it over from modem
thought and. with its help characterizes the distinction of
judgments into analytic and synthetic. An analytic judgment,
which has the fundamental determination of the
truth of its subject·predicate relationship solely in the
concept, rernains from the outset in the sphere of conceptual
analysis, i.e., the sphere of mere thought. It is
a priori. All ianalytic judgments according to their essence
are a priori .. Synthetic judgments are a posteriori. Here
we must firs;t move out of the concept to the object, from
which we "afterward" derive the determinations.
f. How Are Synthetic Judgments A Priori Possible?
Let us oo'w look at traditional metaphysics from the
vantage point of Kant's clarification of the essence of
judgment. A critique of this traditional metaphysics must
circumscribe the essence of thought . and judgment
achieved and claimed in it. What kind of judgment does
traditional rnod~ro metaphysics demand, in the light of
Kant's theory of judgment? As we know, rational metaphysics
is a knowledge out of mere concepts, therefore
cz priori. But this metaphysics does not desire to be a logic,
analyzing only concepts; but it claims to know the super ..
sensible don1ains of God, the world and the human soul,
hence objects themselves,_ Rational metaphysics wants to
~nlarge our 1tnowledge about such things. The judgments
of this metaphysics are synthetic in their claim yet at
the same time a priori, because they are derived from mere
concepts and mere thought. The question concerning the
possibility of the rational metaphysics can thus be expressed
in the formula: How are the judgments claimed in
it possible. Le., how are synthetic judgments which are
also a priori possible? We say "also," since how synthetic
judgments a:re possible a posteriori is understood without
difficulty. Arn enlargement of our knowledge (synthesis)
results when.ever we move beyond the concept and allow
168 WHAT IS A TH lNG?
the givens of perception and sensation, the a posteriori,
the later (as seen by thought, i.e., by that which precedes
[Vorherigen] ), to have their say.
How analytic judgments a priori are possible, on the
other hand, is also clear. They simply reproduce by clarifi~
cation what already lies in the concept. On the contrary,
it remains incomprehensible, at first, how synthetic judgments
a priori are to be possible. According to what has
been said, at least, the mere conception of such a judgment
is contradictory in itself~ Since synthetic judgments
are a posteriori, we could replace the word synthetic by a
posteriori to see the nonsense of this question. It runs:
How are a posteriori judgments possible a priori? Or,
since all analytic judgments are a priori, we can replace
the word a priori by analytic and reduce the question to
the form: How are synthetic judgments analytically possible?
That is as. if we would say: How is fire possible as
water? The answer is self-eVident . .It is: "Impossible.''
The question concerning the possibility of synthetic
judgments a priori looks like a demand to make out something
binding and determinative about the object. without
going into and back to the object.
Yet, the decisive discovery of Kant consists precisely in
allowing us to see that and how synthetic judgments a
priori are possible. To be sure, the question concerning
the "how" of the possibility had for Kant a double meaning:
( 1 ) in which sense and (2) under what conditions.
Synthetic judgments a priori are indeed, as will be
shown, possible only under exactly determined conditions,
which eonditions rational metaphysics is not able to fulfill.
Therefore, synthetic judgments a priori are not achiev ..
able in it. The most special intention of rational metaphysics
collapses in itself. Note: It does not c~llapse
because it does not reach the set goal in consequence of
outer obstacles and limits, but because the conditions of
that knowledge which metaphysics claims in its very
character are not fulfillable on the basis of this character.
/(ant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 169
The rejec:tion of rational metaphysics on the basis of its
inner im]possibility does presuppose a positive demonstrating
•:lf those conditions which make possible synthetic
judlgments a priori. Out of the mode of these conditions
is sllso determined how, i.e., in what sense alone,
synthetic judgments a priori are possible. namely, in a
sense abo•ut which philosophy and human thought in general
kne\\r nothing until Kant.
By ascertaining.· these conditions-that is to say, the
circumscdption of the nature of such judgments-Kant
not only recognizes in what respect they are possible, but
also in what respect they are necessary. Namely, they are
necessary to make possible human knowledge as experience.
According to the tradition of modem thought,
which, dc~pite everything, Kant held to, knowledge is
founded in principles. Those principles which necessarily
underlie our human knowledge as conditions of its possibility
mu:st have the character of synthetic judgments a
prion. In the third section of our chapter there occurs
nothing 1more than the systematic presentation and
groundinjJ of these synthetic and yet, at the same time, a
priori. judgments.
g. The Principle of the Avoidance of Contradiction
as the l~egative Condition of the Truth of Judgment
From t:be above we now understand more easily why
two sectio•ns precede this third one. The first is concerned
with analytic, the second with synthetic judgments. Upon
the backg:round of these first two sections, what is pet~
liar and new in the third section and the meaning of
the ccntet· of the whole work first becomes visible. On
the basis of the achieved clarification of the distinction
between analytic and synthetic judgments, we also under·
~tand why the discussion concerns the highest principles
of these judgments, what this means.
Analytic and synthetic judgments are distinguished
170 WHAT iS A THING?
with regard to their different kinds of relations to the
object, i.e., according to the respective kinds of bases for
determining the truth of the subject-predicate relationship.
The highest principle is the positing of the fi(St and
proper ground in which the truth of the respective kind
of judgment is based. Thus we can say, by turning the
whole thing around:
The first two sections of our chapter enable the original
insight into the essence of analytic as well as synthetic
judgments insofar as they respectively deal with what
constitutes the essential distinction between the two
kinds of judgments. As soon as the discussion is of analytic
and synthetic judgments in Kant's sense, then judgments
and the essence of the judgment in general are
understood in and out of their relation to the object and,
therefore, in accord with the new concept of judgment
achieved in the Critique of Pure Reason.
When, therefore, our chapter is concerned throughout
with judgments, this no longer means that thought is
examined for the sake of itself, but that the relation of
thought to the object and thus to intuition is in question.
This short systematic reflection on Kant's theory of
judgment was intended to enable us to understand the
following discussion of the first section, i.e., to gain an
advance view of the inner connections of what Kant says
in the following.
A judgment is either analytic or synthetic, i.e., the basic
ground of its truth is either in the given subjective concept
or in the object itself. We can consider a judgment as
simply a subject-predicate relationship. By this we only
comprehend a residue of the structure of judgments.
Even for this residue to be what it is, to provide a subjectpredicate
relationship at all, it stiJI stands under the
condition that subject and predicate are unitable, i.e.,
that they are attributable to each other and do not contradict
each other. But, this condition does not yield the
complete basis for the truth of the judgment, because
judgment is yet not fully comprehended.
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 171
The mere unitability of subject and predicate only says
that ant assertion as Ary~tr TtiCo.Ta "'"'' i.e., a saying ( Spruch)
in genc~ral, is ·possible at all, insofar as no contradiction
hinder:s it. However. this unitability as a condition for
asserti•on does not yet reach into the sphere of the essence
of judgment. In this case the judgment is as yet consideredl
without any regard for the giving of grounds
and object relation .. The mere unitability of subject and
predicette tells so litde about the truth of the judgment
that, in spite of being free from contradiction, a subjectpredicaLte
relationship .can be false or even groundless.
"But ~(en if our judgment contains no contradiction it
may connect concepts in a manner not borne out by the
object .. or else in a manner for which no ground is given,
either ll priori or a posteriori, sufficient to justify such
judgment, and so may still, in spite of beirig free from all
inner contradiction, be either false or groundless." (A
150, B 1.90, N.K.S., pp. 189 f.)
Only now does Kant give us the formula of the famous
"principle of contradiction": "No predicate contradictory
of a thil1g can belong to it'~ (A 151, B 190. N.K.S., p. 190).
In his :lecture on metaphysics ( [Erfurt: Politz, 1821],
p. 15) the formula runs: "Nulli subjecto competit praedicatumt
ipsioppositum." ("To no subject does a predicate
belong tthat contradicts it.") These two formulations do
not diffc~r essentially. The one from the Critique of Pure
Reason ~expressly names the thing to which the subjective
concept is related; the lecture names the subjective concept
itsE~Ir.
In thE! last paragraph of our first section Kant explains
why he formulates the principle of contradiction in this
way UuLt deviates from the traditional wording. "Although
t.his famous principle is thus without content and
merely formal, it has sometimes been carelessly formulated
in a manner which involves the quite unnecessary
admixture of a synthetic element. The formula runs: It is
impossible that something should at one and the same
ti1ne bot,h be and not be.,. (A 152, B 191, N.K.S., p. 190.) In
172 WHAT IS A THING?
Aristotle the principle of contradiction runs: TA yap u.ll'l"o &1'4
• I ' ' • ' - _(\\._!__ -- • .. ' ' ~ ,_ I (Meta 1~XC&I' 'Tf •rc&l. P.'l tm'Gp)(lW UUliJ'G.TI'W Tfll at.,.. frlli «a.Tfl-Tu 4vTO - •
physics, IV, 3, lOOSb, 19). ("It is impossible for the same
to occur as well as not to occur at the same time in the
same and with respect to the same., )30 e'unmoglich kann
classelbe zugleich vorkommen sowohl als nicht vorkommen
am selben in Hinsicht auf das selbe.") Wolff writes in
his Ontologie, §28: ,.Fieri non potest. ut idem simul sit ·ct
non sit.'' ("It cannot happen that the same at the same
time is and is not.") The tenns for the detennination of
time ( &p.a., simulj zugle.ich) are conspicuous in these formulations.
Kant's ·own wording omits ••at the same time."
Why is it omitted? ,.At the same time" is a determination
of time and therefore characterizes the object as temporal,
i.e., as an object ofexperience. However, insofar as the
principle of contradiction is. understood only as the negative
condition of the subject-predicate relationship in
general, the judgment is meant in its separation from the
object and its temporal determination. ·But even when one
attributes a positive meaning to the principle of contradiction,
as is soon done. "at the same time," as a deter·
mination of time, does not according to Kant belong to its
formula,.
h. The Principle of the Avoidance of Contradiction
as the Negative Formulation of the Principle of Identity
In what sense can a positive application of the principle
of contradiction be made so that it does not only represent
a negative condition of the possibility of a subject-predi·
·JO W. D. Ross translates this passage: "It 1s, that the same
attribute cannot at the same time belong and not belbng to the
same subject and in the same respect." (Aristotle, op. cit .• VIII.)
Hugh Tredennick's translation nms: "It is impossible for the
same attribute at once to belong and not to belong to the same
thing and in the same relation ... (Tile MetapiJysics [Cambridge:
Hanr.ro University Press, 1947], p. !61.) Heideggcr seems to translate
this passage more cautiously than these. Trans.
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thitzg 173
cate nelationship at all, i.e., for all possible judgments. but
also a. highest principle for a certain kind of judgment?
Tradi1tional rational metaphysics was of the opinion that
the plrlnciple of contradiction was the principle of all
judgatents in general. Using Kant's terms, all judgments
would! include analytic as well ~ synthetic. This distinction
o•f judgments enables Kant to draw more exactly
than vvas done up to that time. the range of the axiomatic
validity of the principle of contradiction. i.e., to delimit it
negatively and positively. A principle, in contrast to a
mere 111egative condition, is a proposition in which there
is posited the ground for possible tnlth, Le., something
sufficic~nt for supporting the truth of the judgment. This
ground is always presented as something that supports
and is sufficient in supporting: it is ratio sufliciens. If the
judgm.ent 4s taken only as a subject-predicate relationship
.. then it is not at all considered with regard to the
grounds that detennine its truth. However, it is in this
regard .that the distinction of analytic and synthetic judgments
becomes determinative. The analytic judgment
takes the object simply according to its given concept
and desires only to retain this concept in the selfsameness
of its c:ontents •. in order to clarify it. The selfsameness of
the co~ncept is the only and sufficient standard for the
attribt:ltiQg and denying of the predicate. The principle
which establishes the ground of the truth of the analytic
judgment must, conseq\lently, establish the selfsameness
of the c:oncept as the .ground for the subject-predicate rela·
tionship. Understood as a rule, the principle mus-t posit
the nec=essity of adhering to the concept in its selfsameness,
identity. The highest princ'iple of analytic judgments
is the principle of identity.
But did we not say that the highest principle examined
in this first section is the principle of contradiction? Were
we not justified in saying this since Kant nowhere speaks
about t:he principle of identity in the first section? But it
must puzzle us that there is the talk about a twofold role
174 WHAT IS A THING?
of the principle of contradiction. The talk about the posi·
tive use of the principle of ·contradiction not only speaks
of the application of this principle as a basis for determination,
but that this application is possible only·if the
negative content of the principle is turned into its positive
one at the same time. Presented in a formula, it is: We
have advanced from A y~. non A , to A =A.
1 Positively used. the principle of contradiction is the
principle of identity. Kant indeed does not mention the
principle of identity in our section, but in the Introduction
he labels the analytic judgm~ts as those "in which
the connection of the predicate with the subject is thought
through identity" (A 7, B 10, N.K.S., p. 48 ); here4'identity"
is presented as the ground .of the analytic judgment. Sim·
ilarly, in a polemical pamphlet, Vber eine Entdeckung . ..
(op, cit .• VIII, 245), analytic judgments are designated as
those "which rest entirely either on the principle of identity
or contradiction.n In the following second section
(A 154-55, B 194, N.K.S., pp. 191 f.) identity and contradic•
tion are mentioned together. The relation of these two
principles has not been decided even today. Nor it is possible
to decide it formally, because this dec'ision remains
dependent on the conception of being and truth as such.
In Scholastic rational metaphysics the principle of contradiction
had priority. For this reason Kant intentionally
terminates the discussion on the principle of contradiction
in our section. For Leibniz, on the contrary_ the principle
of identity becomes the first principle, especially
since for him all judgments are identities (ldentitiiten ).
Kant himself points out, against Wolff, in his habilitation
treatise (Part I: De Principio Contradictionis, Propositio
I) as follaws: Veritatum omnium non datur principium
unicum, absolute primum, catholicon.31 Proposito III
shows the praeferentia of the principium identitatis ...
prae principia contradictionis.
a1 "The principle alone is not given &.'i the absolutely first and
universal of aU truths." Trans.
Kants Manner of Asking About the Thing 175
In malytic judgments, the object is thought only accordin&:
to its concept and not ~s an object of experience,
i.e., as a temporally determined object. Therefore, the
·principle of these judgments in its formula does not need
to cont1ain any temporal determination.
i. 1Cant's Transcendental Reflection; General and
Transcendental~c
The principle of contradiction and the principle of
identity belong solely to logic, and, therefore, concern
only the~ judgment considered logically. When Kant speaks
thus, hE~ certainly looks beyond the difference in the use of
the prilnciple of contradiction that he introduced, and
views as only logical all thought which in its establishment
does not take the way over the object itself. Logic, in the
sense of ''general logic," disregards all relations to the
object t(A SS, B 79, N.K.S., p. 95 ). It knows nothing of
anything like synthetic judgments. All judgments of metaphysics"
hQwever, are synthetic .. Therefore-and this is
now all that matters-the principle of contradiction is
not a p1inciple of metaphysics.
TherE~ore-and this is the further decisive consequence
which 1nediates between sectians one and two-metaphysical
knowledge and every objective synthetic cognition
detnand another foundation altogether. Other prin·
ciples n1ust be established.
Consitdering the importance of this step, we shall try to
conceive~ more clearly the limitation of the principle of
contradiction as the principle of analytic judgments,
especially with regard to the guiding question about the
thingne:~s of the thing. The traditional definitiOn of the
thingne~ss of the thing, i.e., of the being of what is (Sein
des Seienden), has the assertion (the judgment) as its
guideline, Being is determined from out of thought and
the laws of conceivability or inconceivability. However,
the first section of our chapter. which we have just dis·
'
176 WHAT IS A THING?
cussed, asserts nothing else than that mere. thought can
·not be the final. court of appeal for the determination of
the thingness of the thing, or, as Kant would say, for the
objectivity of the object. Logic cannot be the basic science
of metaphysics. However, in determining the object,
which according to Kant Is the object of human knowledge,
it is necessary that thought participates, namely, as
thought referred to intuition, i.e., as synthetic judgment.
Hence logic, as the doctrine of thought, also has a say in
metaphysics. According to the transformed definition of
the essence of thought and judgment, the essence of lotic,
insofar as it is related to it, must also be changed. It must
~a logic which considers thought inclusive of its rela.tion
Ill to the object. Kant calls this kind of logic "transcendental
, logic.''
The transcendental is· what concerns transcendence.
Viewed transcendentally, thought is considered in its
passing over to the object. Transcendental reflection is
not directed upon objects themselves nor upon thought as
the mere representation of the subject·predicate relationship,
but upon the passing over ( V berstieg) and tbe re~
t!on to the -~~ject as this rel~t_il1_n! (Transcendence: 1.
Over to [tlie other side]-as such [Hiniiber zu--als
solches] 2. Passing up, passing beyond [Vber·weg.]) (For
Kant's definition of "transcendental,'' compare Critique
uf Pure Reason, A 12, B 25.82 In a note (Academie edition,
op_ cit., xv, No. 373), it reads as follows: "A determination
of a thing with regard to its essence as a thing is transcendental.")
According to this line of thought. Kant calls his philosophy
transcendental philosophy. The system of principles·
is its foundation. In order to be clearer here and in what
follows we bring into relief several views of the inquiry.
a= Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, A 12, B 25, N.K.S •• p. 59: "I
entitle transcendental all knowledge which is occupied not -so
much with objects as with the mode of our knowledge of objects
insofar as thi$ mode of knowledge is to be possible a priori. A system
of such concepts might be entitled transcendental philos.
ophy." Trans.
,
K.ant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 177
We cus·tomarily express our copitions, and even our
questions and modes of considering, in sentences. The
physicist tmd the lawyer, the htstorian and the physician,
the theoi<J•gian and the meteorologist, the biologist and
the philosopher all speak similarly in sentences and assertions.
Yet the domains and objects to which the assertions
refer remain distinct. Hence, the content of what is
said differs in each case.
Thus it c=omes about that no·other difference is generally
noticed than a difference in content when, for example,
we speak in a biological line of questioning of the division
of. cells, growth, and propagation, or when we talk about
biology itself-its direction of inquiry and assertion.
People thiJnk that to talk biologically about the objects of
biology diJfers from a discussion about biology itself only
with ~ct to content. He who can do the first, and precisely
he, must surely also be able to do the second.
However, this is an illusion, for one cannot deal biologically
with· biology. Biology is not something like algae,
mosses, frclgs and salamanders, cells, and organs. Biology
is a scienc:e. We cannot put the biology itself under the
mictoscop,e as. we do the Qbjects of biology.
The motnent we talk "about" a science and reflect upon
it, all the 11aea.ns. and methods of this science in which we
are well v•ersed fail us. The inquiry about a science d~
mands a p•oint of view whose accomplishment and direction
are ev-en less self-evident than is the mastery of this
science. If it is a matter of an elucidation about a science,
then the opinion easily .gains a footing that such reDec•
tions are "universal," in distinction to the "particular"'
questions of the science. However. it is here not simply a
matter of quantitative differences, of the more or less
"universal." A qualitative difference appears, in the es·
sence, in P•:>int of view, in concept-formation and in demonstration.
In fact, this difference already lies. in each
science itsE~lf. It belongs to it insofar as it is a free histori·
cal action of man. Therefore, continual se]f .. reflection
belongs to every science.
178 WHATIS ATHING?
Let us recall the example: "The sun warms the rock."
If we follow this assertion and its own essential line of
assertion. then we are plainly directed to the objects sun,
rock, and wannth. Our representation is incorporated
into what the object itself offers. We do not pay attention
to the assertion as such. To be sure, by a specific tum in
the point of view of our representing, we can turn away
from sun and rock and consider the assertion as such.
That happened, for instance, when we characterized the
judgment as a subject-ptedicate relationship. This subject-
predicate relationship itself has nothing in the least
to do with the sun and the rock. We take the assertion, the
.\0-yu•, ''The sun warms the rock.'' now purely "logically."
Not only do we thereby disregard the fact that the assertion
refers to natural objects. We do not regard its objec ..
tive relation at all. Besides this first representational di ..
rection (directly to the object) and besides this second
(to the objectless assertory relation in itself) there is now
a third. In the characterization of the judgment "The sun
warms the rock," we said that the sun i·s understood as the
cause and the warmth of the rock as the effect. If, in this
respect, we hold on to the sun and the warm rock, we are
indeed directed toward sun and· rock, and yet not directly.
We do not only mean the sun itself and the wann rock itself.
but we now consider the object "sun" in regard to
how this object is an object for us, in what respect it is
meant, i.e., how our thought thinks it.
We· do not now take a direct view of the object (sun,.
warmth, rock) but with regard to the mode of its objectiv·
ity ( Gegenstiindlichlceit ). This is the respect in which we
refer to the object a priori, and in advance: as cause and
effect.
We are now not only not directed to the object of the assertion,
but also not to the form of the assertion as such,
but rather to how the object is the object of the assertion~
how the assertion represents the object in advance, how
our knowledge passes over to the object, transcendit, and
Kant'~• Manner of Asking About the Thing 179
how, thereby, .and in what objective determination the object
encounters. Kant calls this way of considering transcendental.
In a certain sense the object stays in our view
and in a certain sense so does the assertion, because the
relation between the assertion and the object is to be
grasped.
This transC4:mdental consideration. however, is not an
external hook:ing up of psychological and logical modes
of reflection, but- something more primordial, from which
these two sides have·been separately lifted out. Whenever,
within a scieru:e, we reflect in some way upon that science
itseH, we take the step into the line of vision and onto the
plane of transc:endental reflection. Mostly we are unaware
of this. There:fore our deliberations in this respect are
often accidental and confused. But, just as we cailnot take
one reasonable~ or fruitful step in any science without being
familiar with its objects and procedures, so also we
cannot take a step in reflecting on the science without the
right experienc::e and practice in the transcendental point
of view.
When. in tltis lecture, we constantly ask about the
thingness of the thing and endeavor to place ourselves
into the realm of this question. it is nothing else than the
exercises of tbis transcendental viewpoint and mode of
questioning (lr?ragestellung ). It is the exercise of that
way of viewing, in which all reflection on the sciences
necessarily mc>ves. The securing of this realm, the acknowledged
a11d knowing. taking possession of it, being
able to walk and to stand in its dimensions, is the fundamental
presupposition of every scientific: Dasein which
wants to comp•rehend its historical position and task.
j. Synthetic Judgments A Priori Necessarily Lie at
the Basis of All Knowledge
When we approach the domain of the objects of a science,
the objects of this domain are already determined
180 WHAT IS A THING.?
such and so in advance. However. this does not occur accidentally
nor from a lack of atteJttion on our part a.s if
this pre-determination of the object ever could be prevented.
On the contrary, this pre-determination is neces ..
sary, so necessary that without it we could nqt stand before
objects at all, as before something actording to
which our assertions are directed and on which they are
measured and proven (ausweisen ). How can! a scientific
judgment correspond with its object? How, for instance,
can a judgment about art history really be an art·histori·
cal judgment if the object is not defined in advance· as a
work of art? How can a biological assertion about an ani·
mal be truly a biological judgment if the animal is not
already pre.-defined as a living creature?
· We must always already have a knowledge of content,
I
of what an object is according to its objective nature, i.e.,
for Kant a synthetic knowledge. And we must have it in
advance, a priori. Objects could never confront us as ob.
jects at all without synthetic judgments a priori; by these
objects we "then" guide ourselves in particular investiga·
tions, inquiries, and proofs, in which we constantly appeal
to them.
Synthetic judgments a priori are already asserted in
all scientific judgments. They are pre-judgments (Vor·
urteile) in a true and necessary sense. How scientific a
science is depends not on the number of books written,
nor the number of institutes and certainly not on the usefulness
it offers at the moment. Rather. it depends on how
explicit and defined is its work with which it strives to do
something on its pre·judgments. There is no presupposi·
tionless science, because the essence of science consists
in such presupposing, in such pre-judgments about the
• object. Kant has not only affirmed all this. but has. also
shown it, and not simply shown but also grounded it. He
has set this grounding as a completed work into our his·
tory in the form of the Critique of Pure Reason.
If we take the essence of truth in the traditional sense
Kant's 1\rfanner of Asking About the Thing 181
as the correspondence of the assertion with the objectand
Kant, too, takes it in this way-then truth understood
in this way cannot be, unless the object (Gegenstand) has
been brought to ;a standing-against ( Gegen-stehen) in ad·
vance, by synthetic judgments a priori. Therefore, Kant
calls syntheticjudgments a priori. i.e., the system of principles
of pure understanding, the "source of all truth"
(A 237, B 296, Jtl.K.S., p. 258). The inner connection of
what has been said with our question about the thingness
of the thing is obvious.
For Kant, true (wahrhaft) things., i.e., things of which
a truth for us c:an come to be, are objects of experi ..
ence. However, t.he object only becomes accessible to us
when we transcen1d the mere concept to that other which
first has to be atdded to· it and placed beside it. Such
putting-along-sid•e ( Beistellung) occurs as a synthesis. In
the Kantian sense, we encounter things first and only in
the domain of syJnthetic judgments: and, accordingly, we
first encounter tbe thingness of the thing only in the context
of the questicln of how a thing as such and in advance
is possible as a tl:aing, i.e., at the same time how synthetic
judgments a priori are possible.
6. On the Highest Principle of All Synthetic Judgments
If we put together all that bas been said about the outer
limits of analytic judgments, then the two first principles
of the second section will become understandable:
The explanation of the possibility of synthetic judg·
ments is a probJ,em with which general logic has nothing to
do. I.t need not even so much as know the problem by
name. But in tr"mscendental logic it is the most important
of all questions; and indeed, if in treating of the possibility
of synthetic a priori judgments we also take account
or the conditions and scope of their validity, it is the onl)·
question with which it is concerned. For upon completion
of this enquiry. transcendental logic is in a position com·
182. WHAT IS A THING?
pletely to fulfill its ultimate purpose, that of determining
the .scope and limits of pure understanding.
In the analytic judgment we keep to the given concept,
and seek to extract something from it. If it is to be af·
finnative, I ascribe to it only what is already thought in it.
If it is to be negative, I exclude from it only its opposite.
But in synthetic judgments I have to advance beyond the
given concept, viewing as in relation with the concept
something altogether ditferent from wb&t was thought in
it. This relation is consequently never a relation either of
identity or of contradiction~ and from the judgment, taken
in and by itself, the truth or falsity of the relation can
never be discovered. (A 154 f., B 193 f .• N.K.S., pp. 191 f.)
The "altogether different'' is the object. The relation of
this ''altogether different" to the concept is the represen·
tational ptttting-along-side (Beistellen) of the object in a
thinking intuition: synthesis. Only while we enter into
this relation and maintain ourselves in it does an object
encounter us. The inner possibility of the object, i.e., its
essence, is thus co-determined out of the possibility of
this relation to it. In what does this relation to the ob.
ject consist, i.e., in what is it grounded? The ground
on which it rests must be uncovered and properly
posited as the ground. This occurs in the statement
and establishment of the highest principle of all synthetic
judgments.
- The condition of the possibility of all truth is grounded
in this posited ground. The source of all truth is the principles
of pure understanding. They themselves and therefore
this source of all truth go back to a still deeper
source, which is bro~ght to light in the highest principle
of all synthetic- judgments.
With the second section of our chapter. the whole work
of the Critique of Pure Reason reaches its deepest basis,
founded by it itself. The highest principle of all synthetic
judgments (or. as we can also say, the basic determination
of the essence of human knowledge, its truth and its obKan••'
s Manner of Asking About the Thing 183
ject) is exprt~sed in this formula at the end of the second
section: " ... The conditions of the possibility of experience
in gene:ral are likewise conditions of the possibility
of the objects of experience .. .. " (A 158, B 197, N.K.S.,
p.194.)
Whoever understands this principle understands
Kant's Critiqtle of Pure Reason. Whoever understands
this does not: only know one book among the writings of
philosophy, hut masters a fundamental posture of the history
of man, which we can neither avoid, leap over. nor
deny in any t.Aiay. But we have to bring· this by an appropri·
ate transfornllation to fulfillment in the future. ·
The third section also takes precedence over the second,
lhe latter beiing only an unfolding of the former. Therefore,
a complete and definite understanding of this decisive
second s~~ien is possible only if we already know the
third one. Therefore, we shall skip the second section and
only return to it after the exposition of the third, at the
close of our ]presentation of the question of the thing in
the Critique e'Jf Pure Reason.
All synthetic principles of the pure understanding are
systematically presented in the third section. What makes
an object intc> an object, what delimits the boundaries of
the thingness of the thing. is described in its inner connection.
Also in tlhe exposition of the third section we immediately
begin with the presentation of the particular princi·
pies. The preliminary consideration need be clarified only
so far as to gain a more definite concept of the principle in
general and elf the point of view of the division of the
principles.
For that purpose, the first sentence of the third section
gh,•cs us the ~~cy: 11That there should be principles at all
is entirely due to the pure understanding. Not only is it
the faculty of rules in respect of that which happens, but
is itself the source of principles according to which everya
bing that can be presented to us as an object must con·
form to rules. For without such rules appearances would
184 WHAT IS A THING?
never yield knowledge of an object corresponding to
them.'' (A 158 f., B 197 f., N.K.S., pp. 194 f.)
7. Syste1natic Representatio•1 of All the Synthetic
Principles of Pure Understanding
a. The Principles Make Possible the Objectivity of the
Object; The Possibility of Establishing the Principles
In our pursuit of the question ab011t the thingness of
the thing, we were led to Kant's doctrine of the principles
of the pure understanding. In what way? For Kant the
thing accessible to us is the object of experience. Experience
for him means the humanly possible theoretical
knowledge of what is. This knowledge is twofold. Therefore"
Kant says: "Understanding and sensibility, with us,
can detennine objects only whe1t tTtey are employed in
conjunction." (A 258, B 314~ N.K.S., p. 274.) An .object is
determined as object by the· conjunction, i.e., by the unity
of what is intuited in intuition and what is thought in
thought. To the essence of object (Gegenstand) belongs
the _,against" (Gegen) and the J~standing" (Stand). The
essence of this "against," its inner possibility and ground,
as well as the essence of this 11Standing,'' its inner possibility
and ground, and. finally and above all, the primordial
unity of both, the "againstness., as well as the "constancy,"
constitute the objectivity of the object.
That the determination of the essence of the object results
from principles at aU is not immediately obvious.
Nevertheless, it becomes understandable when we attend
to the traditional direction of the question of the thing in
Western philosophy. According to this, the basic mathematical
characteristic is the decisive: the reeourse to
axioms in every determination of what is. Kant remains
within tlzis tradition. However, the way he conceives and
establishes these axioms brings about a revolution. The
hegemony of the highest principle of all judgments hithKa111'
s Manner of Askitzg About tile Thing 185
erto, the principle of contradiction, is removed from its
position of dominance. What principles replace it?
Fir:st of all, it must be noticeable that Kant does not
speak of axioms. "Axioms" are· for him a certain kind of
principle a priori, namely. those which are immediately
certain, i.e., which are verifiable without further ado from
intuition of an object. However, such principles are not
under discussion in this present context, which is already
indicaLted since it is concerned with principles of the pure
understanding. But. as principles they must also include
the ,grounds for other principles and judgments. Thus
they tlbemselves cannot be based on earlier and more uni·
versal cognitions. (A 148 f., B 188, N.K.S., pp~ 188 f.) This
does not exdude the fact that they have a foundation.
Only the question remains wherein they have their foundatior.
a. Ptinciples which ground the essence of an object
cannot be grounded upon the object. The principles cannot
be~ extracted by experience from the object, since they
themselves first make possible the objectivity of the object.
l'(or can they be grounded in mere thought alone, because
they are principles of objects. Consequently, the
princi:ples do not have the character of general formal logical
propositions, such as ,.A is A," of which we say that
they a:re self-evident. Recourse to common sense fails entirely
here. In the realm of metaphysics it is ·~an expedient
which always is a sign that the cause of reason is in desperate
straits." (A 784, B 812, N.K.S.; p. 622.) What the
naturf~ of the basis of proof for these principles of the
pure understanding is and how they distinguish themselves
through the nature of the, basis of their proof must
be sho·wn from the system of these principles itself.
b. Pure Understanding as the Source and Faculty
of Rules; Unity, Categories
That the determination of the thing in Kant leads back
to principles is an indication for us that Kant remains
186 WHAT IS A THING?
within the tradition. However, this historical cbaracteri~
tion is still not an explanation of the content. When
Kant defines the essence of thought anew, he must also
demonstrate, on the basis of this new formulation of the
nature of understanding. why and to what extent principles
belong to this.
Kant was the first to be able not simply to accept and
affirm the rule of principles, but to ground it from the nature
of the understanding itself. The first proposition of
the third section points to this connection. There he says
expressly that the pure understanding is itself the S<!Uree
of the principles. We must show how far this proves to be
true, especially with reference to all that we have heard
up till now about the nature of the understanding. General
logic, which defines the judgment as the relationship
of the representations of subject and predicate, knows
the understanding as the faculty of connecting representations.
Thus, just as the logical conception of the judgment
is correct but insufficient, so also this conception of the
understanding remains correct but unsatisfactory.. The
understanding must be viewed as a representing that refe~
·s to the object, i.e., as a connecting of representations
so constructed that the connecting refers to the object.
The understanding must be formulated as that representing
which grasps and constitutes this reference to an object
as such.
The connection between subject and predicate is not
merely a connecting in general, but a definitely determined
connecting every time. Let us recall the objective
judgment "The sun warms the rock." Here sun and rock
are represented objectively in that &he sun is conceived of
as the cause, and the rock's becoming warm as the effect.
The connection of subject and predicate occurs on the
grounds of the general relation of cause and effect. Connection
is always a putting-together (Zusamnzensetzen)
with regard to a possible kind of unity which characterizes
the "together" (Zttsantmcn ). In this characterization
Kanl's Manner of Asking About the Thing 187
of the judgment, the primordial sense of Aoyo~ as a gathering-
togelher (Sanunl&.•ng) still faintly shines through.
Each kind of subject-predicate connection in judgments
presupposes and bears in itself the representation of a
unity as the guiding regard, according to which and in
whose Sf~nse the connecting occurs. The anticipating representinJ'
of such unities, which guides connection, belongs
to the essence of the understanding. The representations
of these unities as such and in general are ,.concepts," according
to the definition given earlier. Concepts of such
unities be:longing to the· understanding's action of connecting
are. however, not derived from any objects given beforehand;
they are not concepts which have been drawn
out of pE~rceptions of individual objects. The representations
of these unities belong to the functions of the understanding,
to. the essence of connecting. They lie purely
in the e~;sence of the understanding itself and for this
reason are called pure concepts of the understanding:
categorle:s.
General! logic has worked out a variety of forms of
judgment, modes of subject-predicate connection which
can be arranged in a table of judgments (Urteilstafel).
Kant took over from tradition and augmented this table
of judgm:ents, the exhibition and classification of the different
modes of subject-predicate connection (A 70, B 95 ).
The dim€:nsions of classification are quantity. quality, relation,
and modality. The table of judgments can, there·
fore, give an indication of just as many kinds of unities and
concepts of unity, which guide the different connecting.
Accordin,g to the table of judgments, one can formulate a
table of the concepts of unity of the pure understanding,
of its root concepts {Stammbegriffe) (A 80, B 106, N.K.S.,
p. 113 ). If anything at all is introduced as a condition for
the unifying and unified positing of something manifold,
this reprc~nted condition is used as the rule of the connecting.
1rhe understanding is fundamentally the capacity
for rules. since the anticipating representing of unities,
188 WUAT IS A THING?
which regulates this connecting, belongs to the essence of
the understanding as a connection of representations, and
since these regulating unities belong to the essence of the
understanding itself. Therefore, Kant says: .. We may now
characterize it [the understanding] as the faculty of
rules"; and he adds: "This distinguishing mark is more
Fruitful, and approximates more closely to its essential nature."
(A 126, N.K.S •• p.147.) The same is said in our spot
at the beginning of the third section: The understanding
is the "faculty of rules~" Here the metaphysical definition
of the essence of the understanding shows itself.
But 'in the section in question, the definition of the es·
sence of the understanding traces back still one step
further into the essence. The pure understanding is "not
only the faculty of rules," but even the source of rules.
This means that the pure understanding is the ground of
the necessity of rules at all. That which shows itself (Sichzeigend6s)
must have in advance the possibility of coming
to a stand and constancy, so that what encounters •. what
shows itself, i.e.; what appears, can come before us at all
as standing before us (Gegenstehendes). However. what
stands in itself (lnsichstehendes) and does not fall apart
( Nichtauseinander/(l.hrendes) is what is collected in itself
( Insichgesam,neltes) ~i.e., something brought into a unity,
and is thus present and constant in this unity. This constancy
is what uniformly in itself and out of its~lf exists
as presented toward. (Die Stiindigkeit i$1 das einheitliclae
in sich von sich aus An-wesen.) This presence to it is made
possible with the participation of the pure understanding.
Its activity is thought. Thought, however. is an"/ think";
I represent something to myself in general in its unity and
in its belonging together. The presence (Prasent) of the
object shows itself in the representing, in which it becomes
present to me (auf micl'l zu Priisentwerden)
through the thinking, i.e., connecting representing. But to
whom this presence of the object is presented~ whether
to me as a contingent "r' with its moods, desires, and
Kant's ManJter of Asking About the Thing 189
opinions, or to me as an "I" that puts behind itself everything
"s;ubjective," allowing the object itself to be what it
is, this depends on the "I.'' namely, upon the comprehensive
·ness and the reach of the unity and the rules under
which the connecting of the representations is brought,
i.e., fundamentally upon the range and kind of freedom
by virtue of which I myself am a self.
The pre-senting (vor-stellend) connecting is only pos·
sible for the understanding if it contains in itself modes of
uniting, rules of the \Ulity of the connecting and determining,
if the pure understanding allows rules to emerge and
is itself their origin and source. the pure understanding
is the ground of the necessity of rules, i.e., the occurrence
of princ:iples, because this ground, the understanding itself,
is necessary in fact, according to the essence of that
to which the pure understanding belongs, according to the
essence of human knowledge.
If we human beings are merely open to the pressure of
all that in the midst of which we are suspended,. we
are not equal to this pressure. We master it only when we
serve it out of a superiority, i .. e., by letting the pressure
stand over against us, bringing it to a stand, thus forming
and maintaining a domain of possible constancy. The
metaphysical necessity of the pure understanding is
grounde:d in this need that the pressure must be fr~
stand.intl· According to this metaphysical origin of the
source (,f principles» that source is the pure understanding.
These principles, in turn, are the "source of all truth,.,
i.e., of the possibility for our experiences to be at all able
to correspond to objects.
Such correspondence to .•. is only possible when the
whcrew1ith CWo1nit) of correspondence already comes be.
fore us in advance and stands before us. Only so does
something objective address us in the appearances: only
so do they become recognizable with respect to an object
speaking in them and "corresponding" to them. The pure
underst~mding provides the possibility of the correspond190
WHAT lS A THJNG?
ence to the object thanks to the objectivity of appearance$,
i.e., of the thingness of things for us.
c. The- Mathematical and Dynamical Principles as
Metaphysical Propositions
On the basis of this explanation~ we can understand the
decisive proposition which introduces the third section.
(A 158, B 191 f., N.K.S., p. 194 f.) The principles of pure
reason lay the groundwork for the objectivity of objects.
ln them-namely in their connection-those modes of·
representation are achieved in virtue of which the
"against" of the object and the "stand" of the object are
opened up in their primordial unity. The principles al·
ways concern this twofold unity of the essence of the object
(Gegenstand). Therefore, they must first lay the
ground in the direction of the "against.'' the "againstness"
(Gegen.heit), and simultaneously in the direction of the
"stand" (Standes), the constancy. Thereby, from the es ..
sence of the principles follows their division into two
groups. Kant calJs them the mathematical and dynamical
principles. What is the objective reason for this distinction?
How is it intended?
Kant defines the natural thing as the thing approachable
by us, the body which is as an object of experience,
i.e., of mathematical-physical knowledge. The body is
something in motion or at rest in space. so that the motions,
as changes of place, can be determined numerically
in terms of their relations. This mathematical determination
of the natural body is not an accidental one for Kant,
not only a form of calculating that is merely added on to
it. Rather, the mathematical, in the sense of what i~ mewable
in space, belongs first of all to the definition of the
thingness of the thing. If the possibility of the thing is to
be metaphysically grasped, there is need for such principles
in which this mathematical character of the natural
body is grounded. For this reason, one group of the princiKant's
Manner of Asking About the Thing 191
pies of pure understanding is called "the mathematical
principles." 'l~his designation does not mean that the prin·
ciples themst!lves are mathematical belonging to mathematics,
but that they concern the mathematical character
of natural bc•dies, the metaphysical principles which lay
the ground ol~ this character.
The thing in the sense of a natural body is, however, not
only what i$: movable in space, what simply occupies
.space, i.e., is c~tended, but what fills a space, keeping it occupied,
extending, dividing, and maintaining itseH in this
occupying; it is resistance, i.e., force. Leibniz first set forth
this characteJr of a natural body. and Kant took over these
defining deterl"linations. That which is space-filling, which
is spatially present, we know only through forces which
are effective in space (A 265, B 321, N.K.S., p. 279). Force
is the character by which the thing is present in space. By
being·effecti~e ( wirkt) it is actual ( wirklich ). The actuality
(Wirlclich,keit), the presence, the Dasein of the things,,
is determined from the force (dynamis ), i.e., dynamically.
For that reason Kant calls those principles of pure understanding
whi(:b detennine the possibility of the thing with
respect to its Dasein the dynamical principles. Here, also,
is to be noteel what has been said regarding the designa·
tion "mathen1atical." These are not principles of dynamics
as a discip•line in physics, but metaphysical principles
which first render possible the physical principles of dy·
namics. Not by accident does Hegel give the title "Force
and Understanding" to an important section in the Pheuomenology
of the Spirit, in which he delimits the nature
or the object as a thing of nature.
We find this twofold direction of the determination of
natural bodit!S, the mathematical and the dynamicalJ
dearly prefigured by Leibniz. (Compare Gcrhardt,op.cit.,
IV. 394 f.) Bu1t only Kant succeeded in demonstrating and
explaining its inner unity in the system of principles of
the pure undf~rstanding.
The principles contain those determinations of things
192 WHAT IS A THING?
as appearances, which belong to them in advance, a priori •.
with reference to the possible forms of the URity of the
understanding-like conjunctionsJ i.e., the categories. The
table of categories is divided into four parts. This division
corresponds to that of the principles. The mathematical
and dynamical principles are each divided into two
groups, the whole system into four:
( 1) A.~oms of intuition. (2) Anticipations of perception.
(3) Analogies of experience. ( 4) Postulates of empirical
thought in general. We shall attempt in the following
to understand the titles of the principles from -the
exposition itself. Kant remarks expressly, "These tides I
have intentionally chosen in order to give prominence to
differences in the evidence and in the application of the
principles .... (A 161, B 200, N.K.S.; p. 196.) Under discussion
are the principles of quantity, quality, relation, and
modality.·
The understanding of .the principles is gained only by
going through their demonstrations: for these demonstrations
are nothing other than the exhibition of the "principles,"
the grounds upon which they are based and from
whence they create what they themselves are. For this
reason everything depends on these demonstrations. The
formulas of the principles do not say much, ·especially
since they are not self .. evident. Therefore. Kant has put a
great deal of effort into these demonstrations. He reworked
them for the second edition, especially the first
three groups. Each is constructed according to a definite
schema, which corresponds to the essential contents of
these principles. The wordings of the particular principles
and, above alt their titles arc also different in the first
and second editions. These differences give impOrtant indications
of the direction which Kant's intention to clarify
takes, and how the rea] meaning of these principles is to
be understood.
Once again we take everything in view in order to have
K'ant's Manner of Asking About the Tlzing 193
available hereafter the essentials of the positing and proof
of the principles of pure understanding. The principles
arc "Principles of the Exposition" of appearances. They
are the gt·ounds upon whose basis the exposing of an ob.
iect in its~ appearing is possible. They arc the conditions
for the objectivity of the object.
From \Vbat has now been said about the principles of
pure undlerstandmg in general, we can already more
clearly discern in what sense they are synthetic judgments
a priori and bQw their possibility must be proved. Synthetic
judgments are sueh ~hat they extend. our knowledge
of the object. This generally happens in that we derive the
predicate by way of perception from the object, a posteriori.
But w·e are concerned now with predicates as determinations
of the object, which belong to it a priori. These determinati•
ons are those from which and upon the ground
of which iit is first determined in general what belongs to
an object as object,. those determinations. which bring together
the~ determinations of the objectivity of the object.
They mus;t obviously be a priori; for only insofar as we
know in i:eneral about objectivity are we able to experience
this c>r that possible object. But how is it possible to
determinE~ the object as such in advance-before experience,
and. for it? This possibility is shown in the proofs
of the prillciples. The respective proofs, however, accomplish
nothing more than raising to light the ground of
these principles themselves, which finally must be ever
one and the same and which we then encounter in the
highest principles of all synthetic judgments. Accordingly.
the authentic principles of the pure understanding are
those in W'hich is expressed each time the principle ( Prin ..
'Zip) of tht~ propositions (Sii.tz.e) of1he four groups. Thus,
the real principles (Grundsiitze) are not the axioms, anticipations,
analogies, and postulates themselves. The real
principles are the principles of the nxioms, anticipations,
analogies, and postulates.
194 WHAT IS A THING?
d. The Axioms of Intuition
Let us now notice the difference of the wording of. A
and B (A 162, B 202t N.K.S., p. 197) already mentioned.
(A) "Principle of the pure understanding: All appearances
are, in their intuition, extensive magnitudes."
(B) "Their principle is: All intuitions are extensive
magnitudes."
The wording in B is not always more precise than in A.
They supplement one another, and are therefore of special
value, because this large domain, discovered by Kant, was
still not as thoroughly clarified by him as he envisioned in
the task of a system of transcendental philosophy. But for
us who come after him, just the inconsistencies, the back
and forth, the new starts, the envisioned stiU in process
are more essential and fruitful than a smooth system
wherein all the joints are filled and painted over.
Before we go through the process ·of proof for the fitst
principle we ask what the discussion is about, i.e., con·
ceming the ''elements" (Bes.tandstuclce). We know that
it deals with the determination of the essence of the object.
The ob-ject ( Gegen-stand) is determined by intuition
and thought. The object is the thing insofar as it appears.
The object is appearance. Appearance never means sem·
blance (Schein) here, but the object itself in its being
present and standing there (Dastshen ). In the same place
in which, at the beginning of the Critique of Pure Reason,
Kant names the two elements of knowledge, intuition and
thought, he also characterizes appearance. "That in the
appearance which corresponds to sensation I term its
rnaller; but that which so determines the manifold o£ ap.
pearance that it allows of being ordered in certain relations,
I term the form of appearance!' (A 20, B 34, N.K.S..,
p. 65.) Form is the wherein ( Wori1tneu) of the order ot
colors. sounds, etc.
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 195
d,. Quantun1 and Quatztita.'i
The first principle concerns appearances "with respect
Lu their inltuition," thus with the object in regard to its
''against'' ( gegen ), the encountering, the coming·before-us
( Vor-uns-k~ontmen ). In this respect it is said that appearances
as intuitions are extensive magnitudes.
What dec; "magnitude•• and "extensive magnitude"
mean? The· Gennan expression "Grosse" is equivocal in
gcnet-al and especially in relation to Kant. For this reason
Kant likes to add distingqishing Latin expressions in parentheses,
t:>r he often uses only the Latin in order to tie
down the distinction which he was first to posit clearly.
We find at :the end of one paragraph and at the beginning
of the one following the two labels for magnitude
(Grosse) (.A 163 f., B 204, N.K.S., p. 199)~ magnitude as
quantum a1:1d magnitude as quan,titas. Magnitude as qtuzntitas
(Cf. Reflex. 6338a, Akademie ed., op. cit., XVIII, 659
ff.) answer!; the question "How big?" It is the measure, the
how much 10f a unity taken many times. The magnitude of
a room is l~o and so many meters long, wide, and high.
However. this magnitude of the room is only possible because
the room as spatial at all, is an up,down, back, front,
and beside; it is a quantum. By this Kant understands
what we can call sizable ( Grossltafte) at all. On the other
hand, magnitude as quantitas is th~ measure and measurement
of the sizable. At any given time it is a determinate
unity in which the parts precede and compose the
whole. In c:ontrast, in magnitude as quantunz, in the sizable,
the whole is before the parts. It is indefinite in regard
to the aggn:!gate (Menge) of parts and in itself continuous.
Quantitas iis always qttalltUnl discretu1n. It is possible
only through a subsequent division and a corresponding
combination (synthesis) within and upon the ground of
the quantu111. This latter, however, never becomes what it
196 WHAT IS A THING?
is onlf through a synthesis. Magnitude as quantitas is
always something that can be compared, because deter·
mined by so and so many parts,. while the spatial ( Raum·
lra/tes)-disregarding qua11titas-is always in itself the
same.
Magnitude 41s qunntitas always has to do with the generation
of magnitudes. If this happens in the progress
from parts to parts to the whole through successive piecing
together of the- separated parts, then the magnitude
(quanlilas) is an extensive one. "The 01agnitude of the
amount (aggregate) is extensive." (Reflex. 5881, cf. 5891.)
Magnitude as quanti las is always the unity of a repeated
positing. The representation of such a unity contains at
first only what the understanding in such a repeated positing
''does for itself"; there "is nothing contained thet"ein
which calls for sensory perception." (Reflex. 6338a.)
Quantity is a pure conception of the understanding. But
this is not true of magnitude as quantum,· it is not p~
duced through a positing but is simply given for an intuiting.
d:!. Space and time as Quanta, as forms of pure intuition
What does it mean that appearances as intuitions are
extensive magnitudes? It is evident from the comparative
definitions of magnitude as quantitas and as quantum
that quantitas always presupposes quantum, that magnitude
as measurement, ~s so much, must always be a measurell)
ent of something sizable. Accordingly, appearances
as intuitions (i.e., intuitions as such) must be quanta, sizable,
if they are to be quantities at all. According to Kant,
however, space and time ate of such a nature (quanta).
That space is a magnitude does nut mean that it is something
so and so big. Space is at first precisely never so and
so big, but it is what first makes possible magnitude in the
sense of quantita.~. Space is not composed of spaces. It
does not consist of parts, but each space is simply a limitaKant's
Manner of Asking About the Thing 197
tion pf the \\'hole of space, and in such a way that even
the bounds and border presuppose space and spatial ex·
tension, and remain in space, just as the part of space
remains in s.pace. Space is a magnitude (quantum) in
which the finUe, measurably-determ-ined parts and combinations
always come too late, where the finite of this sort
simply has no right and achieves nothing for the definj ..
tion of its essence. For this reason, space is called an "infinite
magnitude" (A 2S, N.K.S., p. 69 ). This does not mean
''endless" with respect to finite detenninations as quanti·
tas, but as qtArantum, which presupposes nothing end-like
as its conditiion. Rather, on the contrary, it is itself the
condition of c!Very division and finite partitioning.
Space and time are equally quanta continua, basically
·sizable, in-finite magnitudes and, consequently, possible
extensive magnitudes (quantities). The principle of the
axioms of intuition reads: "All appearances are, in their
intuition, ext·ensive magnitudes." (A 162, N.K.S., p. 197.)
But how can intuitions be extensive magnitudes? For this
they must be~ basically sizables (quanta). Kant rightly
calls space anld time such. But space and time still are not
intuitions; they are space and time.
Earlier we defined intuition as the immediate representing
of a t•articular. Something is given to us through
this representting. Intuition is a giving representing, not a
making one, ClT one which first forms something through
combining. Intuition (Anschauung) in the sense of some·
thing looked at (Angeschaut )a:t is the represented, in
the sense of a given. In the spot where Kant defines space
as an in·finite magnitude, he says, however, "Space is
represented as an infinite given magnitude'' (A 25, N.K.S.,
p. 69), and "Space is represented as an infinite given.
magnitude" ( B 40, N.K.S., p. 69). The representing which
brings space as such before us is a giving representation,
=•:• In interpat~lin11 both Kant and Heidegger it is helpful to recall
that the La1tin and English "intuition" is the usual translation ur the ordinary Gennan word "looking at" (AnschtUlung). Trans.
198 WHATIS ATHlNG?
i.e., an intuition. Space itself is something one looks at
and in this sense is intuition (Anschauung ). Space is immediately
given. Where is it given? Is space anywhere
at all? Is it not rather the condition of the possibility of
every "where" and ''there" and "here"? One spatial characteristic
is, for example, proximity (Nebeneinander).
However. we do not .acquire this ,.beside" ( neben) by
first comparing objects lying beside one another. In order
to experience these objects as beside one another, we
must already immediately represent the beside, and,
similarly. the before, behind, and above, one another.
These extensions do not depend upon appearances, upon
what shows itself, since we can imagine all objects
omitted from space, but not space itself. In all cases
of thi.ngs showing themselves in perception, space as a
whole is represented in advance necessarily and as immediately
given. But this one, general given, this represented,
is not a concept~ is not something represented in
general such as "a tree in general.'' The general representation
"tree" contains all individual trees under it as that
of which it is assertable. Space, however, contains all particular
spaces in itself. Particular spaces are simply re·
spective limitations of the one originally single space as
an only one. Space as quantum is immediately given as a
single "this." To immediately represent a particular is
called intuiting (anschauen ). Space is something intuited,
and it is something intuited and standing in view in advance
of all appearing of objects in it. Space is not appre·
hended through sensation, it is something intuited in advance-
a priori-i.e., purely. Space is pure intuition. As
this purely intuited it is what determines in advance
everything empirically given, sensibly intuited, a' the
"wherein" in which the "manifold can be ordered." .Kant
also calls it form, that which determines, in contrast to
matter, which is the determinable. Seen in this way; space
is the pure form of sensible intuition, .specifically that of
the external sense. In order that certain sensations might
Kanl's Manner of Asking About the Thing 199
be referable to something outside of me (i.e •• to something
in auother place in space other than the one in which
I lind myself), this extension of the outside and the out-to
(Hinaus-~;u) must already be given.
Space, according to Kant. is neither a thing that is itself
prese:nt at hand (an sich vorhandenes Ding) (Newton),
nor a manifold of relationships which result from
the relati9ns of things that are themselves present at hand
(an sich 111orhandene Din.ge) (Leibniz). Space is the single
whole of beside one another, behind and over one another,
which is immediately represented in advance in
our recehring what encounters. Space is only the form of
all appearance of the outer senses; i.e., a way in which we
take in wlhat encounters us. It is thus a determination of
our sensi"bility. ''It is, therefore, solely from the human
standpoirtt that we can speak of space, of extended thinp,
etc. If we~ depart from the subjective condition under
which alone we .can have outer intuition .. . . the representation
of space stands for nothing whatsoever." (A 26..,
8 42, N.K.S., p. 71.)
The coJrresponding holds good for time. With this general
clarification of the nature of space we have been try·
ing only to make understandable what it means when
Kant defilnes space as a pure intuition and thereby wants
to have aLchieved the metaphysical concept of space as
such. For it seems strange at first how anything at .all is
dclimit~d by being characterized as an intuition. Trees,
desks, houses. and men are also intuited. But the essence
of the house consists in no way in being an intuition. The
house is intuited insofar as it encounters us. But being a
house doc~s not mean being intuited. Nor would Kant ever
define tht: essence of the house in such a way. ·But what
is right fc>r the house should also be fair for space. This.
would certainly be true if space were a thing of the same
sort as a house, a thing in space. But space is not in space.
Kant d·ocs not say simply: Space is intuition, but .. pure
intuition'' and "form of external intuition." Also, intuiting
200 WHAT IS A THING?
is and remains a mode of pre-senting (Vor-stellen) something,
a way of approach to something and a kind of givenness
of something, but not this something itself.
Only if the way in which something is given constitutes
this something in its 11being" would a characterization of
something as intuition become possible and even necessary.
Space, taken as intuition, then means not only that
space is given in such a way, but that being space consists
in such a being given. Indeed, Kant so means it. The spatial
being of space consists in the fact that it places space
( einriiumt) into what shows itself ( das sich Zeigenden ).
the possibility of showing itself in its extension ( Ausbreitung
). Space places space ( riiumt ein) by giving position
and place, and this placing into is its being. Kant expresses
this placiug by saying that space is what is purely intuited,
what shows itself in advance, before all and for all; and as
such it is the form of intuition. Being-intuited (Angeschautsein)
is the space-placing spatial being of space.
We do not know of any other being of space. Neither do
we have any possibility of inquiring after such. Undeniably,
there are difficulties in Kant's metaphysics of spaceentirely
disregarding the fact that a metaphysics that no
longer contains any difficulties bas already ceased to be
one. Only the difficulties of the Kantian interpretation of
space do not lie where most people like to find them, be it
from the standpoint of psychology or from the standpoint
of mathematical natural science (theory of relativity).
The chief difficulty lies not in the formulation of the problem
of space itself, but in attributing space as pure intuition
to a human subject, whose being is insufficiently defined.
(On how the problem of space is constructed out of
a fundamental overcoming of the relationship to the subject,
compare SZ §§ 19-24 and §70.)
It is now important for us to show only how space
and time are at all conceivable as intuitions. Space gives
itself only in this pure intuiting, wherein space as such is
held-before ( vor-gehalten) us in advance and is pre-sented
as something capable of being viewed (Anblickbares ),
Kant's Manner of Asking About lhe Thing 201
something "pre·formed'' ( vor-gebildet) as that sizable
character of tbe beside one another and over or behind
-one another, a manifoldness which gives out of itself the
possibility of its own delimitations and boundaries.
Space and tilme are pure intuitions. Intuition is dealt
with in the .. Aesthetic." Intuition, accordingly, is what 1»
longs a priori to the objectivity of the object,. what allows
appearances tc• show themselves; pure intuition is transcendental.
The transcendental aesthetic gives us only a
preliminary viE~w.lts real thematics reaches its goal only
in the treatment of the first principle.
d:1• The proof of the first principle. All principles are
based on the highest principle of all synthetic judgments
. With what b.as been said the essentials have been prepared
for OUi' understanding of the proof of the first
principle and tthe principle itself. The proof consists of
three propositions which are clearly distinguished from
each other. The first proposition begins with "All,'-' the
second with "Now is'" and the third with "Thus .. " (A 162,
B-203, N.K.S., pp. 197 f.):t• Unmistakably these three props
.. Full text of proof from Kemp Smith's translation (pp. 197
f.): "{All) appear.anees, in their formal aspect, contain an intuition
in space and time, which conditions them, one and all, a priori.
They cannot be a·pprebended, that is, taken up into empirical consciousness,
save t:hrough tbat synthesis of the manifold whereby
the representations of a determinate space or time are generated,
that is, through c::ombination of the homogeneous manifold and
consciousness of its synthetic unity. (Now) consciousness of the
synthetic unity of' tbe manifold [and] homogeneous in intuition in
b'Cneral, insofar 1LS the representation of an object first becomes
possible by means of it, is, however, the concept of magnitude
(quantum). (Thu.s) even the perception of an object, as appearnncc,
is only possilblethrough the same synthetic unity of the manirotd
of the given sensible intuition as that whereby the unity of
the combination of the manifold [and] homogeneous is thought in
the concept of a magnitude. In other words, appearances are all
without exceptio1rt magnitudes, indeed, extensive magnitudes. As
intuitions in space or time. they must be represented through the
same synthesis whereby space and time in general are determined."
We have:~ added (All). CNow). and parentheses around
''Thus" to correspond to Hcldeggc:r'.s reference. Trans.
202 WHAT IS A THING?
ositions are connected in the form of a syllogism: major
premise, minor premise, and conclusion. Bach of the following
proofs is constructed in this way-the proofs fur
the anticipations and analogies-which, as is true of the
proofs of the axioms, are found only in the second edition.
We carry out the three steps of the deduction by clarifying
what is still unclear in each proposition.
The proof begins by indicating that all appearances
show themselves in space and time. With regard to the
manner of their appearing, in regard to their form, they
contain an intuition of the kind mentioned. What does tbi!;
mean in regard to the objective character of appearances?
We say, "The moon is in the sky." According to its sensible
and perceptual givenness it is something shining, colored,
with variously distributed brightness and darkness. It is
given outside us, there, in this definite form, of this magnitude,
at this distance from other heavenly bodies. The
space-the wherein of the givenness of the moon-is limited
and bounded to this shape, of this magnitude, in these
relationships and distances. Space is a detennined space,
and only this determination constitutes the space of th~
moon. the spatiality of the moon. Being determined to
this shape, this extension, this distance from others, is
grounded in a detennining. The determining is an ordered
putting in connection, a lifting out of particular extensional
parts which are themselves homogeneous in their
partsJI for instance the parts of the circumference of the
shape. Only as the manifoldness of an in itself indefinite
space is divided into parts and is put together out of these
parts in a particular sequence and with determined limits
can the bright-colored show itself to us as moon-shape
with this magnitude and distancet i.e., become received
and taken up by us in the domain of what always already
encounters us and stands-over-against-us ( Gegen-unsstehetrden
).
That which appears, according to its intuition and the
form of its intuitedness, that is, with respect to space and
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 203
its prior undlifferentiated manifoldness, is a such and such
detennined one: a composed homogeneity. This compositeness,
however, is so only on the ground of a unity of
the shape represented therein in such and such a way, Le.,
the magnitude. Unity governs in the synthesis and regu·
lates the representatiQn and consciousness of it. With this
we have set in relief the essential content of the major
premise. The minor premise begins with what was last
said, i.e., widt the consciousness of the synthetic unity of
the manifold (B 203, N.K.S., p.l98).
"Consciousness of the synthetic unity of the manifold
[and] homogeneous in intuition in general. insofar as the
representation of an object first becomes possible by
means of it. is, however, the concept of a magnitude
(quanti)." liere it is stated through what the unity of
something n1anifold becomes possible at all. Let us begin
with what is manifold and homogeneous itself. ·Homogeneity
is·thce consequence of serializing and connec·ting of
the many equal ones into onet a result of multiplicity without
differences. The unity of such is always a ., so and so
much," i.e., quantity as such. Unity as such of a multiplicity
as such is the governing notion of connecting ( Verbinden),
of an "I think," a pure concept of th~ understanding.
But insofar as this concept of the understanding,
"unity," as the rule of unificationt refers to something
sizable, to q1uantum as such, it is the concept of a quanti.
This concept, quantity, brings what is homogeneous and
manifold to .a stand in a unified collectedness (Gesarnmeltheit
). By thiis means the representation of an object, the
••1 think" and the over-against for the I, first become possible.
Now, as suggested in the major premise, insofar as
appearances; appear in the form of space and time the first
detenninatic)n of the encountering as such is this composite,
shaped unification with respect to quantitas.
Now the t:onclusion follows with necessity: It is thus
the same unity and unification which permit the encountering
of the! appearances as shaped, so and so big. in the
204 WHAT IS A THING?
separations of space and time. and "'hich bring the homogeneous
to a stand in the composition of quantides of a
multiplicity (Menge). Therefore, appearances are from
the beginning extensive magnitudes with respect to their
intuition and the way of their encountering standing-
~ against (Gegenstehen). The quantum, space, is always
determined as these appearing spatial formations only in
the synthesis of quantity. The same unity of quantity permits
what encounters to stand-over-against (entgegenstehen)
collectedly. With this the principle has been
proved. However, thereby it is also established why all
principles which say something about the pure manifoldness
of extension (e.g., the shortest distance between two
points is a straight line) as mathematical principles. are
valid for the appearances themselves, why mathematics is
applicable to the objects of experience. This is not selfevident
and is possible only under certain conditions.
These are presented in the proof ·of the principle. Therefore,
Kant calls this principle the "transcendental principle
of the mathematics of appearances" (A 165, B 206,
N.K.S., p .. 200 ). Under the title "Axioms of Intuition" these
axioms are not themselves laid down or discussed. The
principle is proved in that the ground of the objective
truth of the axioms is pQsited, i.e., their ground as neces·
sary conditions of the objectiv.ity of objects. The applicability
of the axioms of the mathematics of extension and
number, and, therewith of mathematics as such, is necessarily
justified, because the conditions of mathematics itself,
those of quantitas and quantum, are at the same time
the conditions of appearance of that to which mathematics
is applied.
With this we hit upon that ground which makes pQssible
this ground and all others, to which every proof of
every principle of the pure understanding is referred. This
is the connection which we now for the first time bring
more clearly into view:
The condition of experiencing appearances (here with
Kanls Manner of Asking About the Thing 205
regard to shape and size )-namely, the unity of the synthesis
as quantity-this condition of experiencing is at the
same time the condition of the possibility of an object of
experience. ln this unity the encountering manifoldness
of the "agaittSt" (Gegen) first comes to a "stand" (Stand)
-and is object ( Gegenstand ). The particular quan-titas of
spaces and times makes possible the reception of the encountering,
the apprehension, the· first permitting of a
standing-agaLinst of the object (das erste Gegenstehenlas-.
sen des Geg~o~nstandes ).; Our question about the thingness
of the thins:, about the objectivity of the object, is answered
by the principle and its proof as follows: because
objectivity a.s such is the unity of the collection of something
manif.old into a representation of unity, and is a
conception in advance, and because what is manifold encounters
in spaee and time, what ·encounters must itself
stand again:st us in the unity of quantity as extensive
magnitude.
Appeanm·ces must be extensive magnitudes. Thereby is
assert-ed abc•ut the being of objects themselves something
which does not already lie in the conception of something
iri general about which we assert in a Judgment.
With the de1termination of being an extensive magnitude
something is synthetically attributed to the object; but
it is attributed a priori, not on the ground of perceptions
of single objects, but in advance, out of the essence of
experience as such.
What is the hinge upon which the whole proof revolves,
i.e., what is the ground upon which the principle itself
rests? What is. therefore, primordially expressed by the
highest principle itself and thus brought into the light?
What is the ground of the possibility of this principle as
a synthetic judgment a priori? In it the pure concept of
the understanding, quantity, is transferred to the quan-
1 um space, a:md so to the objects which appear in space.
How can a _pture concept of the understanding become determinant
at all for something li'ke space? These totaiJy
206 WHATIS ATHING?
heterogeneous pieces must conform in some respect if
they are to be united at all as determinable and determin ..
ing, ·and it must be in such a way that there is an object by
virtue of this unity of intuition and thought.
Because these questions repeat themselves in each of
the principles and their proofs, they are not to be answered
right now. We first want to see that these questions
constantly and unavoidably return in the treatment of the
principles. However, we do not wish to postpone the
answer until the close of the exposition of the principles,
but shall expound it after the discussion of the following
principle, in the transition from the mathematical to the
dynamical principles.
e. The Anticipations of Perception
The ground and inner possibility of the object is posited
in the principles. The mathematical principles grasp the
object with respect to the ''against'" and its inner possibility.
Hence, the second principle as well as the first
speaks of appearances with respect to their appearing.
''The principle which anticipates all perceptions, as such,
is as follows: In all appearances sensation, and the real
which corresponds to it in the object ( realitas phaenomenon),
has an intensive magnitude, that is, a degree." (A
166, N.K..S., p. 201.) "Their principle is:an In all appearances,
the real that is an object of sensation has intensive
magnitude, that is, a degree." (B 207, N.K.S., p.
201.)
Here appearances are taken in another respect than in
the first principle. In the first principle appearances are
considered as intuitions with respect to the fpnn of
space and time in which the encountered encounters. The
principle of the "anticipations of perception'' does not attend
to the form, but to that which is determined through
a& N.K.S. leaves out "Their principle is:" Trans.
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 207
the determining form. It is the determinable as matter of
the form. Matter does not mean here the material stuff
presen1t at hand. Matter and form are understood as "concepts
of reflection," and indeed as the most general ones
which result from reflecting back (Rilckbesinnttng) on the
structu.re of experience. (A 266 ff., B 322 ff., N.K.S., p.
280.)38
In tbe proof of the "anticipations" the discussion is of
sensatioons, of the reaL and also again of magnitude, specifically
of intensive magnitude. It is now not a· question of
axioms of intuition, but of basic aspects of perception,
i.e., the: sort of representing •'in which sensation is to be
found" (B 207, N.K.S., p. 201 ).
e1• Th.e several meanings of the word "sensation"; the
tbeory of sensation and modern natural science
In human cognition the cognizable must encounter and
must be given, because what is, is something other than
ourselves. and because we have not ourselves made or
created. what is. One does not first have to show a shoe to a
shoemiLker for him to know what a shoe is. He knows this
withou·t the encountering shoe, and knows it better and
more exactly without this, because he can produce one. By
contras:t, what he cannot make must be presented to him
from sc>mewhere else. Since we human beings have not
created what is as such as a whole and could never create
it, it must be shown to us if we are to know of it.
In t~1is showing of what is in its openness, that doing
CT11n) has a special task which shows things by creating
them in a certain sense. the creation of a work of art. Work
makes ,~orld. World within itself first reveals things. The
. :to Heidegger refers here to tbe fourth section of the "AppendJx:
The! Amphiboly of Concepts of Reftection: 'Matter and
Form:~· These two concepts underlie all other reflection, so in~
scpar~bly are they bound up with all employment of the understandmg.
Trans.
208 WHAT IS A TH lNG?
possibility and necessity of the work of art is only one
proof that we come to know what is, only when it is specially
given to us.
However, this usually happens through encountering
things in the realm of everyday experience. For this to·
occur, they must approach us, affect us, obtrude and intrude
upon us. Thus occur impressions, sensations. Theit
manifoldness (Mannigfaltigkeit) is divided into the different
areas of our senses: sight, hearing, etc. In sensation
and its pressure we find that "which constitutes the &
tinctive difference between empirical and a priori know}..
edge., (A 167, B 208 f., N.K.S., p. 202). The empirical is the
a posteriori~ that which is second, viewed from us--considering
us as .first. It is always subsequent and playing
along side of us. The word "sensation," like the word "representation/'
has at first two senses: in one sense it means
what is sensed-red as perceived, the sound, the red-sensation,
the sound-sensation. It also means the sensing as a
state of ourselves. Yet this differentiation is not its point
(Bewenden ). What is aesignated as "sensation" is for thls
reason so equivocal, because it occupies a peculiar inter•
mediate position between the things and the htiman
beings, between object and subject. The interpretation
and explanation of the essence and role of sensation
changes according to how we interpret what is objective
and according to the conception of the subjective. Here let
us only cite an interpretation which prevailed very early in
Western thought and is not completely overcome even
yet. The more one passed over to seeing things according
to their mere appearance, their shape, position, and exten•
sion (Democritus and Plato), the more obtrusive in contrast
to spatial relation became that which fills intervals
and places, i.e., the sensory given. Consequently, the
givens of sensations-color, sound, pressure, and impact
-became the first and foremost building blocks out of
which a thing is put together.
Kant's ~ranner of Asking About the Thing 209
As soon as things were broken up into a manifold of the
sensory givennesses. the interpretation of their uniform
essence could proceed only by saying: Things are really
only collections of sensory data.ln addition they also have
value and an aesthetic value. and-insofar as we know
them-a truth value. Things are collections of sensations
with values attached. In this view sensations are represented
as sometlhing ·in themsel\Tes. They are themselves
made into thin@~, without first saying what that thing
might be, throush whose splitting the fragments (the sensations)
remain as allegedly original.
But the next st:ep is to interpret the fragment-things, the
sensations, as effects of a cause. Physics establishes that
the cause of colo·r is light waves, endless periodic undulations
in the ethe:r. Each color has its determined number
of vibrations peJr second. For example, red has the wave
length of 760"" and 400 billion vibrations per second. That
is red. This is the objective red in contrast to the mere
subjective impn~ssion of the red sensation. lt would 0e
even nicer if we could trace the red sensation back to.a
stimulation of e!lectric currents in the nerve pathways.
When we get tb.at far we know what things are objectively.
Such an expbmation of sensation appears to be very
scientific, and yt~t it is not, insofar .as the domain of the
givenness of sensations and what is to be explained. i.e.,
color as given, has at the .same time been abandoned·. Besides,
it goes wmoticed that there is still a difference,
whether we mean by color the determinate color of a
thing, this red 01:1 the thing, or the red sensation as given
in the eye. This last-mentioned givenness is not given immediately.
A very complicated and artful focus is necessary
to grasp the color sensation as such in contrast to the
color of the thing. If we observe-apart from any theory
of knowlcdge-lthe givenness of the color of the thing,
e.g., the green of a leaf, we do not find the slightest cause
210 WHAT IS A THING?
which might produce an effect on us. We are never aware
of the green of the leaf as an effect on us, but as the
green of the leaf.
Where, however, the thing and the body are represented:
as extended and resisting things, as in modern mathe.
matical physics, the viewable manifold sinks to one of sen;.
sory givennesses. Today the given for experimental atomic
physics is only a manifold of light spots and streaks on a
photographic plate. Now fewer presuppositions are neces·
sary for the interpretation of this given than for the interpretation
of a poem. It is only the solidity and tangibility
of the measuring apparatUs which gives rise to the appearance
that this interpretation stands on firmer ground than
the allegedly subjective basis of the interpretations of
poets in the arts.
Fortunately. there first still exists (apart from the light
waves and nerve currents) the coloring and shine of
things themselves, the green of the leaf and the yellow Qf
the grain field, the black of the crow and the gray of the
sky. The reference to all that is not only also here, but
must be constantly presupposed as that which the physiological-
physical inquiry breaks up and reinterprets.
The question arises as to what more truly is (was ist
seiender), that crude chair with the tobacco pipe depicted
in the painting by Van Gogh, or the waves which correspond
to the colors used in the painting, or the states of
sensation which we have "in us" while looking at the picture?
The sensations play a role each time, but each time
in a different sense. The color of the thing is, for instance,
something different from the stimulus given in the eye,
which we never grasp immediately as such. The color of
the thing belongs to the thing. Neither does it give itse~
to us as a cause of a state in us. The thing's color itself, tlie
yellow, for instance, is simply this yellow as belonging to
the field of ·grain. The color and its bright hue are always
determined by the original unity and kind of the colored
thing itself. This is not first composed of sensations.
Kant's· Manner of Asking About the Thing 211
The referenc:e serves only to make it clear to us that it is
not immediatc=ly clear what is meant by sensation. The
undelimited aJ:nbigUity of the word and the uncontrolled
diversity of the fact intended only reflect the uncertainty
and baftlement which prevent a conclusive definition of
the relation between man and thing.
Furthermore, the opinion reigns that the comprehen·
sion of things as a mere manifold of sensory givens is the
presupposition for the mathematical-physical definition
of bodies. ThE~ theory of knowledge according to which
knowledge ess.entially consists of sensations is held to be
the reason for the rise of modern natural science. But the
contrary is n:ally the case. The mathematical starting
point concerning the thing as something extended and
movable in sp:ace and time leads to the consequence that
the usual evc=ry~y given (das. umgiinglich alltiiglich
Gegebene) is apprehended as mere material (Ills blosses
Material) and is fragmented into the manifoldness of the
sensations. Oll1ly the mathemaUcal starting point effected
a favorable hearing for a corresponding theory of sensation.
Kant alsc~ remains at the level of this starting point..
Like the tradition before and after him, he skips that
sphere of thinJ~S in which we know ourselves immediately
at home, i.e., things as the artist depicts them for us, such
as Van Gogh'~; simple chair with the tobacco pipe which
was just put d·own or forgotten there.
c:!. Kant's c:oncept of reality: intensive magnitudes
Although K.ant's critique remains from the beginning
within th~ sphere of the experience of the object of mathematical-
physic:al natural knowledge, his metaphysical in•~
rpretation of the givenness.of sensations differs from all
before and after him, i.e., it is superior to all of them. The
interpretation, of the objectivity of the object in regard to
the sensory given in it is carried out by Kant in the positing
and proof ·of the principle of the anticipations of per212
WHAT IS A TH lNG?
ception. It is characteristic of the usual interpretations of
Kant that they have either overlooked this sectiQn altogether
or mi.sunderstood it in every respectr The proof of
this is the baftlement with which a fundamental concept i~
manhandled. which plays an essential role in the prln·
ciple. We are referring to the concept of the real and of
teality.
The clarification of this concept and of its application
by Kant belongs to the first elementary course in the introduction
to the Critique of Pure Reason. The expression
"reality" is usually used today in the sense of actuality or.
a~stence. Thus Qne speaks of the question of the reality of
the external world and one means by this the discussion
whether something really and tndy exists outside of our
consciousness. To think Realpolitisch means reckoning
with the· actually existing situations and circumstances:
Realism in art is the mode of representation in which one
copies only what is actual and what one takes to be act~.
We have to drop the currently familiar meaning of "reality"
in the sense of actuality in order to understand what
Kant means by the real in appearance. This meaning of
"reality .. current today, moreover, corresponds neithet
with the original meaning of the word nor the initial use
of the term in medieval and modem philosophy up to
Kant. Instead, the present use has presumably come about
through a failure to understand and through a misunder·
standing of Kant's usage. ·
Reality comes from realitas. Realis is what belongs to
res. That means a something (Sache). That is real which
belongs to something. what belongs to the what-content
(Wasgehalt) of a thing. e.g., to what constitutes a house or
tree. what belongs to the essence of something, to tl1e
essentiQ. Reality sometimes means the totality of this definition
of its essence or it means particular defining elements.
Thus, for example, extension is a reality of a
natural body as well as weight, density, resistance. All
such is real, belongs to the res, to the something "natural
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 213
body,'' regardlless of whether the body actually exists or
not. For instance, materiality (Stofllichkeit) belongs to
the reality of a table. For this the table does not need to be
real in the present-day sense of "real." Actual being or
existence is so•mething which must .first be added to the
essence, and in1 this regard exist entia itself was considered
a reality. Only Kant first demonstrated that actuality,
being present~.at-hand, is not a real predicate of a thing;
that is, a huncbred possible dollars do not in the least differ
from. a hundred realdollars according to their reality. It i$
the same, one hundred dollars, the same what (Was), res,
whether possible or actual
We distinguish actuality from possibility and necessity.
Kant unites all three categories under the title of modality.
From the fact that "reality" is not found in this group, we
can see that r·ealitv does PQt mean actuality. To which
group does ream;belong? What is its most general sense?
It is qpqU~luale-a so and so, a that and that, a what.
"Reality,. as thinghood (Sachheit) answers the question
of what a thinu is and not whether it e¥ists. (A 143, B 182,
N.K.§:, p. 184.) tbe real that which constitutes the res,
is a determination of re.s as su · . Pre-Kailtian metaphysics
explains the co,ncept Q ity in is way.ln Kant's use of
the metapbysi·cal concept of reality, he .follows the textbook
of Baum1garten in which the tradition of medieval
and modern metaphysics is discussed after the manner of
the classroom.
The fundau1ental character of realitas according to
Baumgarten is; determinatio, determinateness. Extension
and materiality are realities, i.e., determinations which
belong to the res, "body.'' Viewed more exactly, realitas is
a .determiuatio posit iva et vera, a determinateness belongin&
t.o_the true MSence of sometbjnl. and posited as such.
The opposite concept is a what which does not determine a
thing positively, but in regard to what is missing in it.
Thus blindness is a.e.rivation (Fehlen) which is lacking in
what is seeing. However, blindness, obviously, is not noth214
WHA:T IS A THING?
ing. While it is not a positive determination, it is a nega~
tive one, i.e., a .,negation." Negation is the concept op-
1 posite to reality. ·
Kant gives a new critical interpretation to realitas, as he
does to all the fundamental concepts he takes from tracli;.
tional metaphysics. Objects are the things as they appeal\·
Appearances always bring something (a what) to a show•
ing of itself. What thereby presses and attacks us and ap.o
preaches us, this first what and thinglike ( Sachhafte} is
called "the real" in appearance. uAliquid sive obiectum
qualificatum is the occupation of space and time." 'Aka•
derriie edition, op. cit., XVIII n. 6338a, p. 663.) The real ill
appearances, the realilas phaenomenon (A 168, B 209) is
that which, as the first what-content (Wasgehalt), musl
occupy the void of space and time,. in order for aqything
to appear at all, so that appearance and the press ·of an
against ( eines Gegen) become possible.
The real in the appearance, in Kant's sense, is not what
is actually in the appearance as contrasted with what is
inactual in it and could be mere semblance and illusion
~ (Schein und Dunst). The real is that which must be given
at all, so that something can be decided with respect to
1
its actuality or inactuality. The real is the pure and first
necessary what as such. Without the real, the something,
the object is not only inactual, it is nothing at all, i.e.,
without a what, according to which it can determine itself
as this or that. In this what, the real, the object qualifies
' ) itself as encountering thus and so. The real is the first
quale of the object.
Along with this critical concept of reality Kant also
uses the tenn in the traditionally wider sense for each
thinghood, which co-determines the essence of the .. thing,
the thing as an object. Accordingly, we frequently meet
with the expression "objective reality/' precisely in a fun;
clamental inquiry of the Critique of Pure RetlSon. This
twist has induced and promoted the epistemological ridsunderstanding
of the Critique of Pure Reason. The term
Kcznt's Manner of Asking About the Thing 215
''objective reality" was explained in our discussion of the
first princiiple. Here it is a question as to whether and how
the pure c~oncepts of the understanding, whiCh. although
not taken empirically from the object, at the same timo
belong to 1the content of the object; for example, whether
quantity atctually has objective reality. This question is
not whether quantity is actually present-at-hand, or
whether S()mething outside consciousness corresponds to
it. Rather itt is asked whether and why quantity belongs to
the object: as object. Space and time have "empirical
reality."
Besides sensation and the real, the discussion in the
second pnlnciple is about intensive magnitude. The distinction
illl the concept of magnitude between qUilntum
and quanlitas has already been discussed. If we speak
about extensive magnitude, then magnitude is called
qt~antitas, the measure of size ( Grossenmass).. and specifically
that pf an aggregate added piece by piece. The in- l
tensive, thc~intensio, is nothing else than the quantitas of a
qualitas .. o~r a real, e.g., the Dloon's shining surface. We a~
prebend the extensive magnitude of the object when we
measure its.spatial extension step by step~ Its intensive
magnitude·, on the other hand, we apprehend when we do
no·t attend to the extensive size, nor pay attention to the
s~rface as surface, but the pure what of its shining, the
••how grea1t" of the shining, of the coloring. The quantitas
of the qual' it as is the intensity. Every magnitude as quantitas
is the·unity of a multiplicity; but extensive and in ten·
sive magn:itude are this in different ways. In extensive
magnitudes the unity is always apprehended only on the
grounds of, and in the gathering together of, the many im ..
mediately ]posited parts. In contrast, intensive magnitude
is immedia.tely taken as a unity. The multiplicity which belongs
to tl~e intensity can be represented in it only in
such a wa)' that an intensity of negation down to zero is
approached. The multiplicities of this unity do not lie
spread out in it in such a way that this spreading yields a
216 WHAT iS A THING?
unity by adding together the many stretches and pieces.
The single multiplicities of the intensive magnitude stem,
rather, from the limitation of the unity of a quale,· each of
them, again. is a q,,a/e, they are many unities. Such unities
are called degrees. A loud tone;. for instance, is not com•
posed of a determined number of these tones, but there is
a gradation by degrees from soft to lo~d. The multiplicities
of the unity of an intensity are many unities. The
multiplicities of the unity of an extension are single units
of a multiplicity. Both intensity and extension, however,
permit themselves to be ordered as numerical quantities~
But the degrees and steps of intensity do not thereby become
·a mere aggregate of parts.
e:t. Sensation in Kant, undet·stood transcendentally:
Proof of the second principle
Now we understand the principle in its general con~
tent: "The principle which anticipates all perceptions, as
such, is as follows: In all appearances sensation, and thi
real which corresponds to it in the object (realitas pha~
nomenon), has an intensive magnitude, that is, a degree!"
(A 166, N.K.S., p. 201.) In B 201 (N.K.S., p. 201) this prin·
ciple reads: "In all appearances, the real that is an object
of sensation has intensive magnitude, that is. a degree."
We first grasp this principle, however, only on the basis
of the proof which demonstrates wherein-as a principle
of pure understanding-this principle grounds. The steps
of proof are at the same time the interpretation of the
principle. Only by mastering the proof shall we be in~-a
position to evaluate the difference between versions A and
B and decide about the supcriori ty of the one over, the
other. It remains noteworthy that the principle says something
about sensations, not on the basis of a psychological
empirical description or even a physiological explanatiop
of its formation and origin, but by way of a transcendental
consideration. This means t.hat sensation is taken in adKant's
Manner of Asking About the Thing 217
vance as son1ething which comes into play within the relationship
of a stepping over to the object and in the determination
of its objectivity. The essence of sensation is
delimited through its role within the transcendental relationship.
In this wa;y Kant wins a different fundamental position
within the iraquiry about sensation and its function in the
appearance ·of things. Sensation is not a thing for which
causes are sought, but a given whose givenness is to be
made under:standable through the conditions of the possibility
of experience.
These sau1e circumstances also explain the designation
of these priiJ.clples as anticipations of perception.
The prool: has the same form again even though the
major and ulinor premises and conclusion are spread out
over more stmtences. The minor premise begins (B 208):
"Now from empirical consciousness to pure ... "; the
transition to· the conclusion begins: "Since, however, sensation
is not in itself •• :•; the conclusion: "Its magnitude
is not extens;ive ..•• "11
We will ~y to build up the proQf in a simplified form· so
that the joints show up more distinctly. Since we have
already con11·eyed the essential definitions of "sensation,"
st .,Now from empirical consciousness to pure consciousness a
graduated transition is possible, the real in the former completely
vanishlng and a merely formal d priori consciousness of the m...Ufold
in space and time remaining. Consequently there is also possible
a synthesis In the process of generating the magnitude of a
sensation froa1 its beginning in pure intuition equals zero, up to
any required 11:1agnitude. Since, however, sensation is not in itself
an objective representation, and since neither the intuition of
space nor that of time is to be met with in it# its magnitude is not
extensive but intensive. This magnitude is generated in the act of
apprehension whereby the empirical consciousness of it can in a
certain time iincrease from nothing equals zero to the given
measure. Corr.esponding to this intensity of sensation, an i••ten·
sive magnitudt~, that is, a degree of influence on the senses (i.e., on
the special SeJl'lSe involved), must be ascribed to all objects of
perception, ins.ofar as the perception contains sensation." (B 208,
N.K.S., pp. 201 f.) Trans.
218 WHAT IS A THING?
"reality," and "intensive magnitude," no difficulty remains
as to content. First we may be reminded again of the
probandum of the proof. It is to be demonstrated that the
pure concept of the understanding (here the category of
quality) determines appearances in advance with respect
to their what, their encountering aspect, that as a consequence
of this quality of appearances a quantity (in the
sense of intensity) is possible, thus warranting the appU.·
cation of number and mathematics. With this proof it i$
also demonstrated that an against cannot encounter at aU
without the presentation (Vorhalt) of a what, $0 that in
any receiving there must already Ue an anticipation of a
what.
Major premise: All appearances in addition to the spacetime
determinations contain, as what shows itself in per ..
ception, that which makes an impression (Kant calls this
the matter). what affects us, lies exposed and occupies the
space-time domain.
Transition: Such an ex-posing and a present given (Auf~
und Vorliegendes) (positum) can be perceivable as so ly ..
ing before and occupying only by being represented in advance
in the light of a what-character, in the opened range
of the real in general. Only upon the open background of
the "'hat-like can sensibles become sensations. Such a re.
ception of the what as it encounters is "momentary"
(augenblicklich) and does not rest upon a consequence of
an apprehension that puts together. The awareness of the
real is a simple having-there (Da-haben), allowing it to be
posited; it is the positio of a positum.
Minor premise: It is possible that in this open field of
the real what occupies a place alternates between the extremity
of full pressure and the void of the sp•ce-time domain.
With respect to this range of the pressure there is in
sensation a sizable that does not piece together an increasing
aggregate, but always concerns the same quale, yet a}_;.
ways of a varying so-large.
Tra1uition: The how-large, the quantity of a quale, i.e.,
of something real, is, however, a definite degree of the
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 219
samE~ what. The magnitude of the real is an intensive magnitude.
Conclusion: Consequently what affects us in appearance,
the sensible as real, has a degree. Insofar as the
degr•ee as quantity may be determined in number. and
number is a positing in accord with the understanding of
0 hovi many times one," therefore what is sensed as an
encountering what can be brought to a stand mathe·
matically.
Therewith th~ principle has been proven. According to
B 20'7 (N.K.S., p •. 201): "In all appearances, the real that
is an o·bject o.f sensation has intensive magnitude, that is,
a denree." More exactly, the proposition ought to read: In
all appearances, the real, which constitutes the constancy
and the against-like (das Gegenhafte-Stiindige) of sensations
....... The proposition by no means asserts that the
real has a degree because it is an object of sensation.
Ratber, because the impressing wiwt of sensation is a
reaUty for the representing which allows the standing
against (Bntgegenstehenlassen) and since the quantity of
a rea&lity is but the intensity, therefore sensation (as the
somcrthing [Sachheit] of the object) has the objective
character of an intensive magnitude.
On the other hand, the wording of the principle in A is
subj•~t to misunderstanding and nearly contrary to what
is really meant. It suggests the misconception that sensation
has, first of all, a degree and then in addition the
reality which corresponds to it, differing from it in its
thinuness and standing behind it. But, the principle wants
to assert that the real bas first and properly as quale a
qua111tity of degree-and therefore also does sensation,
whoHeobjective intensity rests upon the prior givenness of
the r·eality character of what can be sensed. The wording
of A is, therefore, to be modified in the following way: "In
all a·ppearances sensation, and that means first the real,
which lets the sensation show itself as an objectivity, bas
an inLtensive magnitude."
lt seems as though we have arbitrarily changed Kant's
220 W'HAT IS A THING?
text here. However, the different wordings of A and B
demonstrate how much effort Kant himself expended to
force his novel insight on the transcendental nature of sensation
into the understandable form of a proposition.
e,.. What is strange about the anticipations.
Reality and sensation
Just bow new the principle was for Kant himself we
easily recognize from the fact that ·he constantly wondered
at the strangeness which the principle expresses.
And what can be stranger than this. that even where we
are dealing with such things as sensations, which assail
us, which we only receive, that ju~ in this "toward us"
(auf un.s tu) a reaching out and an anticipation by us is
possible and necessary? At first glance, perception as pure
reception and anticipation as a reaching and grasping beforehand
( entgegen·fassendes Vorgreifen) are thoroughly
contradictory. And' yet it is only in the light of the reaching
and anticipating presentation ·of reality that sensation becomes
a receivable, encountering this and that.
On the one hand we believe that to sense or perceive
something is the most ordinary and simplest thing in the
world. We are sentient beings. Certainly! But no human
being has ever sensed a "5omething" or a ,.what" alone.
Through what sense organ could this ever take place? A
"something" is neither seen, beard, smelled. tasted, nor
felt. There is no sense organ for a "what" or for a "this"
and "that.'' The what-character of what can be sensed
must be pre-sented beforehand and anticipated in advance
within the scope and as the scope of what can be received.
Without reality there is nu real: without ·a real, no, sensi·
bles. Since such an anticipating beforehand can be assumed
least in the domain of receiving and perceiving, and
to make this strangeness recognizable, Kant gives the
name "anticipation" to the principle of perception. seen
in general, all principles in which the predetermination of
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 221
the object is expressed are anticipations. Sometimes Kant
uses thi:!i term alone in the wider sense.
Human perception is anticipating. An animal, too. has
perceptions. i.e., sensations, but it does not anticipate. It
does not permit the impressing to encounter in advance
as a whc'lt that stands in itself, as the other which stands
toward the animal as. an other and thus shows itself as
existing. Kant remarks in another place (Religion Within
the Limits of Reason Alone) that no beast can ever say
"I." This means that it cannot bring itself into a standpointas
that against which an objective other could stand.
It must not be inferred from this that the animal has no
relation to food, light, air, and other animals, and even in
a very orderly fashion-we need only recall how animals
play. But in all this there is ·no attitude toward what is
any more than there is toward what is not. Their lives run
their course on this side of the openness of being and nonbeing,
though at this point the far-reaching question may
arise as to how we know what is happening in the animal
and wh;:~.t is not. We can never know it immediately, although
mediately we can gain metaphysical certainty
about b•~ing an 4nimal
Anticipation of the real in perception is strange not
only by comparison with animals btJt equally in comparison
with the traditional conception of knowledge. We are
remindEd of the 1'in advance" ( im vorhinein) which at an
earlier caccasion was cited in the distinction between analytic
and synthetic judgments. The synthetic judgment
has the peculiarity that it must step out of the subjectpredica1te
relationship to something wholly other, to the
object. The first fundamental grasping-out (Hinausgriff)
by reprE~entation in the direction of the having-there (Dahaben)
an encountering "what" as such is the anticipation
of the J~eal, that synthesis, provision, in which a what
sphere is represented at all, from which appearances ate
to be able to show themselves. Therefore, Kant says in the
conch1ding sentence of his treatment of the anticipations
222 WHAT IS A THING?
of perception: "But the real. which corresponds to sensa·
tions in general, as opposed to negation = 0, represents
only that something the very concept of which includes
being [i.e .• presence of something]-1
• and signifies nothing
but the synthesis in an empirical consciousness in gen•
eral." (A 175 f., B 211, N.K.S., p. 208.)
The anticipating representation of reality opens our
viewing for any being-what (Was-seiendes) in general
(here this means "being") and thus forms the relation
on the basis of which the empirical consciousness is at all
consciousness of something. The what in general is the
"transcendental matter" (A 143, B 182, N.K.S., pp. 183 f.)
the what which belongs in advance to the possibility of
an against ness.( Gegenhaften. )"in the object.
Psychology may describe sensations in whatever ways:
physiology and neurology may explain sensations .as
processes of stimulation, or however; physics may demonstrate
the causes of sensations· in ether waves and ·elec~
tric waves-all these are possible s.orts of knowledge. But
they do concern the question of the objectivity of objects
and of our immediate relationship to these. Kant's discovery
of the anticipations of the real in perception is es~
cially astonishing if one considers that. on the one hand,
his esteem of Newtonian physics and, on the other, his
fundamental position in Descartes' concept of the subject
are not suited to promote the free view of this unusual
anticipation in the receptivity of perception.
e... Mathematical principles and the highest principle.
The circularity of the proofs
If we now take together both principles in a shortened
form, we can say that all appearances are extensive magnitudes
as intuitions, and they are intensive magnitudes
as sensations: quantities. Such are possible only ip
aH Heidegger's interpolation. Trans.
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 223
quanta. AH quanta, however, are continua. They have the
feature that no separable part of them is ever the smaUest
possible. T'berefore, all appearances, in the what of their
cncounteri111g and in the how of their appearing, are con·
stant. Thi!; character of appearances, the constancy,
which con,:ems its extension as well as its intensity, is
discussed by Kant in the section concerning the second
principle f<,r both principles together (A 169 ff .• B 211 ff.,
N.K.S., pp. 203 ff.). Thereby the axioms of intuition and
anticipatio1ns are united together as mathematical principles,
i.e., as those which metaphysically establish the pos·
sibility of an application of mathematics to objects.
The conc:ept of magnitude-in the sense of quantityfinds
its support in science and its meaning in numbers.
Number represents quantities in their determinateness. -...
Because the appearances come to a stand as an againstness
( GegeJrzhaftes) in general and in advance anly upon
the ground of the anticipating collection, in the sense of
the concepts of unity (~tegories), quantity and quality,
therefore ttaathematics is applicable to objects. Therefore
it is possible on the ground of a mathematical construe·
tion to meet with something corresponding in the object
itself and to prove it by experiment. The conditions of the
appearing uf appearances, the particular quantitative determinateness
of their form and matter, are at the same
time the conditions of standing...against (Gegenstehen ),
the collectedness and constancy of the appearances.
Both pri1nciples of the extensive and intensive magni·
tude of all appearances enunciate (but in a particular
respect) the! highest principle of all synthetic judgments.
This fact must be observed if the character of the above
proofs of the princi'ples is to be comprehended. Apart
from specific difficulties in content: there is something
strange abo,ut these proofs. We seem constantly tempted
to say that all thought processes move in a circle. This
difficulty otf the proofs needs no special pointing out.
However, a clarification of the reason for the difficulty is
224 WHAT IS A THING?
necessary, This does not lie merely in the special content
of the principles, but in their nature. The reason for the
difficulty is a necessary one. The principles are to be
proved to be those determinations which first make an·
experience of objects possible at all. How is something
like that proven? By showing that the principles are
themselves only possible on the basis of the unity and
the belonging together of the pure concepts of the understanding
with that which intuitively encounters.
This unity of intuition and thought is itself the nature
of experience. Therefore, the proof consists in showing
that the principles of pure understanding are made possible
by that which they ought to make possible-experience.
This is an obvious circle. Certainly, and for the
understanding of the process of the proof and of the char ..
acter of what we are discussing it is indispensable not
only to suspect this circle and so to create doubts about
the cleanness of the proof, but to recognize the circle
clearly and to carry it out as such. Kant would have
grasped little of his own task and intention if he had not
been aware of the circular character of these proofs. His
assertion that these propositions are principles, although,
with all their certainty, never as obvious as
2 x 2 = 4, points this out. (A 733, B 761, N.K.S., pp. 589 f.)
f. The Analogies of Experience
The principles are rules according to which the standing-
against of the object forms itself for human pre-sent•
ing (Vor-stellen). The axioms of intuition and the antic~
pations of perception concern the againstness of an
against from a double point of view: first, the wherein of
what is against, and second, the what-character' of the
against.
The second group of principles., on the other hand, concerns
(relative to the possibility of an object in general)
the possibility of an object's standing, of its consta,cy,
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 225
or, as Kant puts it, the existence ("Dasein"). "the actuality,"
<>f the object, or in our words, the being-prescnt·athand
(Vorhandensein).
The (1uestion arises why the analogies of experience do
not belc>ng to the principles of modality. The answer must
be bealuse Dasein is definable only as a relation of the
states of appearances among themselves and never immediatc!
ly as such.
An object stands first and is first disclosed as standing
when it is determined in its independence of any accidental
:act of perception of it, "Independence from .•. "
is, however, only a negative determination. It is not suf.
ficient 'to estabUsh in a positive way the standing of the
object. This is obviously only possible by exposing the
object in its relationship to other objects and if this· relationshijp
bas the constancy and the unity of a self-subsisting
connection within which particular objects stand. The
constancy of the object is, therefore, grounded in the connectiOill
(nexus) of appearances-or, more exactly, in
what uaakes such a connection possible in advance.
ft. Analogy as· correspqndence, as the relation of
relations, and as the determination of its· being
that (Dass-seins)
Connection (nexus), like compositio, is a mode of conjunction
(conittnctio) (B 201, n.) and presupposes in itself
the;~ guiding representation of a unity. However, now
it is nc•t a question of those conjunctions, which set together
the given, that which is encountered, in its wl!atcontenlt
according to spatiality, reality, and their degrees;
it is no1t a question of the conjunction of what is always of
the sa11ne sort (homogeneous) in the what-content of appearance
( compositio, i.e., aggregation and coalition).
Rather, it is a question of a conjunction of appearances
with n~pect to their sometime existence ( Dasein), their
presence. The appearances, however, change, occur at
226 WHAT IS A THING?
diJferent moments with different durations, and hence
differ from each other (heterogeneous) with respect to
their existence (Dasein). Because it is now a matter of
the determination of the constancy of the object, consequently
upon its stand in the unity of its connection with
the rest, and thus upon the determination of its existence
(Dasein) in relation to the existence (Dasein) of the
others, it is a matter of a conjunction of what is hetero
·geneous, a unified standing together in different time relationships.
This standing together of the whole of appearances
in the unity of the rules of its togetherness
(Zusammen ), i.e., aceording to laws, is, however, nothing
other than nature. "By nature, in the empirical sense,
we understand the connection of appearances as regards
their existence according to necessary ·rules, that is, according
to laws. There are certain laws which first make a
nature possible, and these laws are a priori." (A 216, B
263, N.K.S., p. 237.) For these "original laws," expressed
in the principles, Kant reserves the heading "Analogies of
Experience.'' It is not a question now-as in the preceding
principles--of "intuition" and "perception,'' but of the
whole of knowledge, wherein the totality of objects, nature
as presence~ is determined. It concerns experience.
But why "Analogies .. ? What does "analogy" mean? We
shall here try a reversed procedure. By clarifying the title
we will prepare for an understanding of these principles.
First of all, let us again recall the contrast between
these principles and the preceding ones. The mathematical
principles concern those rules of the unity of conjoining
according to which the object detennines itself
as an encountering what in its what-content. The possible
forms of the encountering can be constructed in advance
upon the ground of the rules of quantitative compo~ition
in the domain of the extension of space and the intensity
of what is sensed. The mathematical construction of the
whatness of appearances may be verified and proven
from experience by examples (A 178, B 221, N.K.S., p.
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 227
210). In t11e following principles it is not a question of the
determin~Ltion of what encounters in its whatness, but
of the det•:rmination as to whether, bow, and the fact that
what encc:•unters does encounter and does stand here, i.e.,
of the determination of the existence (Dasein) of the appearances.
within their connection (or context).
The existence (Dasein) of an object, whether and that
it is pres·ent-at-hand, can never be immediately forced
and broujlht before us a priori by a mere representation
of its pos:sible existence. We can only infer the existence
of an obj•:ct (that it must be here) from the relation of
the object: to others, not by immediately procuring the existence.
We can ·took for this existence according to definite
rules; we can even reckon it as necessary, but we
cannot by this means conjure it up now or ever. It must
first allo"'' itself to be found. When it has been found, we
can reco@~ize it and "identify" it by certain marks as
that for Vihich we were seeking.
These rules for looking and finding the existential connection
tof appearances (Daseinszusammenhang der
Erscheinungen )-the existence of the one non-given appearance
in relation to the given existence of the othersthese
rulE's for the determination of the relations of existence
of objects are the analogies of experience. Analogy
means correspondence, a relation, namely. of "how
... so" ('M'ie ••• so). What stands in this relation are again
relations. Understood according to its original concept,
analogy i!; a relation of relations. Mathematical and metaphysical~:
malogies differ according to what stands in this
relation. ln mathematics the "how •.. so" contains relationships~,
which, in .short, are homogeneously construable:
jus1: how a is to b, soc is to d. If the relation of a
and b is g;iven, and c also, then, according to the analogy,
d can be defined and construed, and can itself be provided
by such &L construction. In metaphysical analogy, on the
other hand, it is not a question of purely quantitative
relations, but of qualitative ones, relations between what
228 WHATIS ATIIING?
is heterogeneous. Here the encountering of the real, its
presence, docs not depend on us. but we depend on it. m
the domain of what encounters us. if a relation of two that
encounter is given,. as well as something that correspond~
to one of the two givens, then the fourth itself cannot tie
inferred in such a way as tho~gh it were already pres•
through such an inference. Moreover, according to tbe
rule of correspondence, we can only conclude the re~
lion of the third to the fourth. From the analogy we o~
tain only an indication about a reladon of somethin;
given to something not given, i.e., an indication of hoW)·
from the given, we must look For the non-given and a»
what we must meet it when it shows itself.
Now it becomes clear why Kant can and must call the
determining principles of relationship of the existence a,_S
appearances among themselves ''analogies." Since it is .a
question of the determination· of existence, that and
whether something is, but since the existence of a t:hicd
is never brought about a priori, but can only be enco~
tered, and, indeed, in relation to something present-af.t'
hand, the rules which are necessary here are always fot
a correspondence: analogies. There lies, therefore, in sueb
rules an anticipation of a necessary connection of percep..
tions and appearances in general, i.e., of experience. The
analogies are analogies of experience.
f:!. The analogies as rules of the universal
time·determination
Therefore, the "principle" of the analogies of eXperience
reads as follows in B 218 (N.K.S., p. 208):
'•Experience is possible. only through the represent~
tiou of a necessary connectiot'l of perceptions.'' Or in
more detail (A 176 f., N.K.S .• p. 208): "All appearances
are, as regards their existence ( Dasein) subject a priori
to rules determining their relation to one another in one
time."
Kant's Ma11ner of Asking About the Thing 229
The key wo•rd is "time," and it indicates the connection
in which thes:c principles as rules have their anticipatory
power. Kant1• therefore, expressly calls the analogies
''rules of uni~versal time-determination" (A 178, B 220 ). I
"Universal" time-detennination designates that time-de- I tennination vvhich is present in advance of all empirical
time measur~:ments in physics, ahd it is present in advance
specifically as the ground of the possibility of such
measurement. Since an object can stand in relation to
time with res:pec:t to its duration and with respect to the
sequence in ~~hich it occurs with other objects and with
respect to its being at the same time another, Kant distinguishes
"three rules of all relations of appearances in
time" (A 177, B 219, N.K.S., p. 209), that is, the existence
of appearanc.~ in time with respect to their relation in
time.
Up to now we have not directly discussed time. Why
does the relation to time move into the foreground in the
analogies of e!Xperience? What has. time to do with what
these principles regulate? The rules concern the relation
of appearancc~s among themselves in regard to their '4ex ..
istence" (Das.ein ), i.e., the constancy (Stiindigkeit) of the
object in the totality of what constitutes (Bestand) appearances.
C<>nstancy in one sense means that which
stands here (tJastehen), the presence. But constancy also
means continuance· (Fortwiihren), enduring (Beharren).
In the tenn •·c:onstancy" we hear both in one. It suggests
continuous presence, existence of the object. We can easily
see that presence and presentness contain a relation
to time just alS do continuance and enduring. Principles
which are concerned with the determination of the con- \
stancy of the object, therefore, necessarily and in an exceptional
sense have to do with time. For us, the question
is in what wa!f· The answer presents itself when we think
through one c,f the principles and run through its proof.
We choose fo;r this the first analogy. (A 182 ff., B 224 ff..,
N.K.S., pp. 212 ff.)
230 WHAT IS A THING?
By way of introduction we briefly point out how Kant
circumscribes the ordure of time. We restrict ourselves;
thereby, to what is necessary for an understanding· of
these principles. Rightly seen, however, ·we first directly
discover the essentials of Kant's concept of time only
through the formation and proof of the analogies.
Until now time was discussed only in passing when the
nature of space was· being defined. There we attributed to
time what corresponds to what was said of space. We also
find that Kant introduces the discussion of time together
with that of space in the transcendental ~esthetic, We
say "introduces" intentionally, because what is said there
concerning time neither exhausts what Kant has to say
nor is it the decisive part.
Corresponding to space and by the same funda~ental
proofs, time is first exhibited as pure intuition. Co-exist-.
ence and succession are represented in advance. Only by
this pre-senting-in..advance (Voraus-vor-stellung) can one
represent to oneself that several encountering things are
simultaneous or one after the other." ... Different times
are not simultaneous but successive (just as different
spaces are not successive but simultaneous)." (A 31, B
47, N .K.S., p. 75.) Different times, however, are only parts
of one and the same time. Different times are only as delimited
in one single whole time. Time is not first comtO
posed by a piecing together, but is unlimited, endless, not
made by a composition, but given. The originally united,
single totality of succession is represented immediately,
in advance, i.e., time is an a priori intuition,. a "pure intuition.''
Space is the form wherein all outside appearances encounter
us. Time, however, is not limited to these; it is
also the form of inner appearances, i.e., the appearing and
succession of our modes of relation and experiences. For
this reason time is the form of all appearances in general.
"In it alone is actuality (i.e., existence, presence) of appearances
possible at all." (A 31, B 46, N.K.S., p. 75.) The
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 231
existenc:e of each appearance, as existence, stands in arelationship
to time. Time itself is "unchangeable and per- \
manent.," 1 'it does not run out." " ••• Time itself does not
alter, but only something ·which is in time." (A 41, B S8,
N.K.S., p. 82.) In each now time is the same now: time is I
constantly itself. Time is that enduring which always is.
Time is pure remaining, and only insofar as it remains are
succession and alteration possible. Although time bas a
.now-character in:each now, each now is unrepeatably this
single now, and different from every other now. Accordingly,
time itself permits different relations between appearanc::
es with regard to itself. What encounters can
stand in different relations to time. If it is related to time
as pemll8Dent, i.e., to time as quantum, as sizable, then
existenc:e is taken according to its time-magnitude and it
is determinable in its duration, i.e., as to how much of
time as a whole. Time itself is taken as a magnitude. If
the appearing is related to time as the succession of nows,
then it :is taken as it is successively in time. If it is related
to time as the sum total, then the appearing is taken just
as it is now in time. Accordingly, Kant designates. three I
modes of time: . duration, su~ssion, and co-existence.
With re:gard to these three possible relations of the existence
of appearances to time {the time-relations), there
are thr.ee rules for their determination, three principles
that have the character of analogies:
I. .Anal9gy: Principle of Permanence.
II. Analogy: Principle of Succession in Time. in Acl:
ordance with the Law of Causality.
III. Analogy: Principle of C~istence, in Accordance
,with the Law of Reciprocity or Community.
We s·hall try to grasp the first analogy, i.e., to follow its
proof. ]~ere it might be well to remember again the general
nature of analogies. They are to be established as
those rules which, in advance, determine the constancy
(StiindJigkeit) of the object (Gegenstarzd), the existence
of the appearance, in their relation to one another. But
232 WHAT IS A THING?
because the existence of appearances cannot be at our
disposal, this rule cannot present and produce existence
through a priori construction. It only gives a direction
for looking for relations along which we can infer from
one existence to another. The proof of such rules has to
demonstrate why these principles are necessary and
wherein they are grounded.
f3• The first ·analogy and its proof. Substance as a
time-detennination
The principle of permanence reads: •4 All appearances
/
contain the· pemian_ -ent (substance) as the object itself,
and the transitory as its mere determination, that is, as a
way in whieb the object exists." (A 182, N.K.S., p. 212.) In
order that this sentence may be read at once as an analogy,
it is important to pay attention to the "and," i.e ...
to the citing of the relation of permanence and the tr~itory.
Kant points out that "at all times," not only in
philosophy but also in common sense, something like sub ..
stance, permanence in the change of appearances, is. presupposed.
The principle tacitly underlies all experience.
"A philosopher, on being asked how much smoke weighs,
made the reply: 'Subtract from the weight of the wood
burnt the weight of the ashes which are left over, and you
have the weight of smoke.' He thus presupposed as undeniable
that even in fire the matter (substance) does not
vanish, but only suffers an alteration of fonn." (A 185,
B 228, N.K.S., p. 215.) But Kant emphasizes that it is not
enough for one only to "feel" the need for the principle of
permanence as a basis. It must also be demonstrated: (1)
that and why there is something permanent in all appearances;
(2) that the changeable is nothing else th8n a
mere determination of the permanent, i.e.. something
that stands in a time-relation to permanence as a timedetermination.
Kant's proof is again presented in the form of a sylloKa:
nt's Manner of Asking About the Thing 233
gism. The proof concerns rules for the determination of
existence, lbut existence means "to be in a time/' and, as
Kant remarks, it is to be taken as a mode of time (A 179,
B 222, N.K-.S., p. 210). Therefore, the hinge on which the
proof turns must be time, in its peculiar nature in its relation
to appearances. Since a proof in the form of a
syllogism has its formal turning point in the minor
premise, t.he decisive thing must be said in the minor
premise, '"'hich mediates between the major premise and
the conclusion.
Major J'lremise: All ~p~ces-i.e., all that which
encounters;. us humanS-encounter in time and, there-fore,
with respect to the unity of their connection, they
stan9.JD..tlu:. ynjty of a~ermination. Time itself is '
the originaal enduring; original, beCause only as long as
time endUt.res_ is something enduring in time possible.
Therefore, permanence as such is what faces us and underlies
in advance aU that encounters us: the substratum.
Minor p.,.emise: Time itself, as absolute, cannot be per·
ceived as itseH, i.e., the time wherein everything that
encounter:s has its spot is not perceivable as such. If it
were peroeivable, the particular time.spots (Zeitstellen)
of what eJ:tcounters, and, therewith, what encounters in
its time-spot could also be determined a priori in it. In
contrast, t:ime, as the permanent in all appearances, demands
that all deternlining of the existence of appearances,
i.e.,, their being-in-time (In-der-Zeit-sein ), refer in
advance and above all to this permanent.
Conclw:ion: Thus, first and above all the standing of
the object: must be conceived from out of permanence,
i.e., the representation of enduring in change belongs in
advance til the character (Sachhaltigkeit) of an object.
HowevE:r, the representation of enduring in change is
what is meant by "substance" in the pure concept of the
understanding. Consequently, according to the necessity
of this principle, the category of substance has objective
reality. There is constant alteration in the object of ex234
WHAT IS A THING?
perience, of nature. Constant alteration is that mode of
existence which follows another mode of the existence of
the same object. The determination of alterations, thus
of natural e·vents, presupposes permanence. Alteration
) is determinable· only in relation to permanence, since
) only the permanent can be changed, while the transitory
suffers no alteration (Veriinderung), but only a change
(Wechsel ). The accidents by means of which the determi·
nations of substance are grasped are, therefore, nothing
other than various modes of permanence, i.e., of the ex ..
istence of substance itself.
The whole of the constancy of objects is determined
upon the ground of the relation of their alterations among
one another. Alterations are modes of the presence of
forces. For this· reason the principles which concern the
existence of objects are called dynamical. Alterations,
however, are alterations of something permanent. Perma ..
nence must determine beforehand the horizon within
which objects in their connection are constant. Accord ..
ing to· Kant, however, permanence as continual presence
is the fundamental character of time. Time thus plays
a decisive role in the determination of the constancy of
objects.
In all the proofs of the dynamical principles this role
of time comes to the fore through the decisive assertion
about the nature of time which is brought to bear eacb
time in the minor premise. Time, on the one band, is the
sum total within which all appearances encounter; within
which, therefore, the standing of objects is determined
in their relations of permanence, of succession, and of coexistence.
On the other hand, as is always asserted in the
minor premise, time itself cannot be perceived. With regard
to the possible determination of the presence of objects
at any time, this means nothing less than that the
momentary position in time and time relation of an object
can never be constructed a priori out of the pure
running on of time as such, i.e., can never themselves be
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 235
intuitively produced and presented a priori. What is actual
of tim,e, i.e., what is immediately present, is only the
particular now. There remains only the possibility of determining
the time character of a not immediately given
but nevertheless real object, from out of what is just then
present, thus determining it ·a priori in its possible timerelation
to what is present; and thereby to gain a guideline
for how the object is to be sought. The object's existence
(D•2Sein) itself must always chance to occur in
addition (zu-fallen). Accordingly, if the whole of appear·
ances in its objectivity is to be capable .of being experienced
by u.s at all, then well·founded rules .are required
which would contain an indication of the time relations
as such in· which the encountering ·mus.t stand, so. that
the unity olf the mstence of appearances. i.e .• a nature. is
possible. 1'hese transcendental time-determinations are
the analogjies of experience, the first of which we have
been disau;sing ..
The seco·nd analogy reads according to B 232:
II:All alte:rations take place in conformity with the law
of the connection of cause and effect'~; while according to
A 189: .,Everything that happens, that is, begins to- be,
presuppose~ something upon which it follows according
to a rule." (N.K.S., p. 218.)
The proof of this principle presents for the first time
the foundation of the law of causality as- a law for the
objects of c~xperience.
The third analogy reads in B 256 as follows:
''All sub~stances, in so far as they can be perceived to
co-exist in spt~ce, are in thoroughgoing reciprocity"; while
according to A 211: 11 Ail substances, so far as they coexist,
stand in thcJroughgoing community, that is, in mutual in·
tcraction." (N.K.S., p. 233.)
This principle and its proof, aside from its content, is
of special importance for Kant's argument with Leibniz,
as all the ''analog.ies" really throw a specia.llight on the
change in the fundamental position of the two thinkers.
236 WHAT IS A THING?
In closing we refer to the second group of the dynamical
principles, the last group in the whole system ·of
principles.
g. The Postulates of Empirical Thought As Such
g1. The objective reality of the categories.
The modalities as subjective synthetic principles
We know that the system of principles of the pure~
derstanding is ordered and divided according to the order
and division of the table of categories. The categories~
representations of unity which arise in the nature of the
act of understanding itself, which serve as rules of judg..
mental connection, i.e., the determining of the encountering
manifold ·in the object. The four titles for the fo~
groups of categories are quantity, quality, relation. amd
modality. In· retrospect we see more clearly:
In the axioms of intuition it is demonstrated in what
sense quantity (as extensive magnitude) belongs nece!r.
sarily to the nature of the object as something encoun·
tering.
In the anticipations of perception it is demonstrated
how quality (reality) determines what encounters in advance
as an encountering.
In the analogies, the principles of correspondence, of
what-stands-in-relation and its determination, it is dem.-.
onstrated in what sense the object with respect to its constancy
can only be determined on the basis of a previous
view of the relations in which what encounters (the ap.
pearances) stands. Since these relations must represent
and include in advance all objects capable of coming to
appearance in any way, they can only be relations of what
is inclusive of all appearances-namely, relations of time ..
The three groups of principles corresponding to the categories
of quantity, quality, and relation have this in comKant's
Manner of Asking About the Thing 237
mon: they determine in advance what belongs to the factual
nature of the object as something encountering and
constant. With n~ard to these categories, these three
groups of principles show that (and in what sense) the
categories constit11:1te in advance the factual nature of the
object, its thingh()od (Sachheit) as such and as a whole.
These three categories are the realities of the nature of
the object. The corresponding principles prove that these
categories as the!Se realities make the object (Gege~
stand) possible cmd belong to an object (Objekt) as
such. They sho~T that the categories have objective
reality.
The principles so far discussed constitute the foundation
through whic:h a horizon is first formed at all, within
which this and that and many can encounter and stand in
connection as sotnething objective.
What more, the!n, is the fourth group of principles (the
postulates of em.pirical thought) to accomplish? This
group corresponds to the categories of modality. The
term already indiicates something characteristic. Modality:
modus, mode~. manner, a how-namely, in contrast
to the what, to the real as such .. Kant introduces the discussion
of the fourth group of principles with the remark
that the categories of modality have a "special" char ..
acteristic (A 219, B 266, N.K.S., p. 239). The categories of
modality (possibility, actuality or existence, necessity) do
not belong to the factual content of the nature of an ob ..
ject. Whether, for instance, a table is possible, actual or
necessary, does n•ot touch on the thinghood (Sachlzeit) of
"table." This renr1ains always the same. Kant's way of
expressing this is that the categories of modality are not
real predicates of the object. Accordingly, neither do they
belong to the content of (sachhaltig) the nature of
objectivity at all, nor to the pure concept of that which
delimits the nature of the object as such. Rather, they
assert something of how the concept of the object is re238
WHAT IS A TH lNG?
Ia ted to its existence and the modes of its existence, that is
to say, according to which modes the existence of the
object is to be determined.
The principles which say something about this cannot,.
therefore, like the foregoing, concern the question if and
how the categories (possibility, actuality, necessity) have
objective reality, since they do not belong at all to the
reality of theobject.Because the principles cannot assert
anything like this, neither can they be demonstrated in
this respect. There ~e. therefore, no proofs for these principles,
but only elucidations and clarifications of theif
content.
12· The postulates correspond to the nature of
experience. The modalities refer to ~erience and
no longer to conceivability
The postulates of empirical thought as such indicate
only what is required in order to define an object as pos.·
sible, actual, or necessary. There also lies in these r&!·
quirements (upostulates") the delimiting of the nature
of possibility, actuality, and necessity. The postulates
correspond to the nature of th~t through which objects
are definable at all: the nature of experience.
The postulates are merely assertions of a requirement
which lies in the nature of experience .. This, therefore;
comes into play as the standard by which the modes of
existence and, therewith, the essence of being is measured.
Accordingly, the postulates run as follows (A 218,
B 265 £., N.K.S., p. 239):
"L That which agrees with the formal conditions of
experience, that is, with the conditions of intuiti<?Jl and
of concepts, is possible."
Kant conceives of .. possibility" as agreement with what
regulates in advance the appearing of appearances: with
space and time and their quantitative determination. The
possibility of a representation can be decided only as the.
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 239
representation obeys what was said about the object in
the first group of principles. Rational metaphysics, on
the contrary, had until then defined possibility as noncontradic:
tion. According to Kant, what does not contradict
itse~f is indeed thinkable. However, nothing about
the possibility of the existence of an object is settled by
this possiibllity of thought. What ·cannot appear in space
and time is an impossible object for us.
"2. That which is bound up with the material conditions
of experience, that is, with sensationJ is actual.''
Kant conceives of actuality (Wirklichkeit) as connection
with what shows us something real, having content
(Sachhaltiges)! with sensation. The actuality of an object
can t•e decided only in that the representation obeys
wha.t is ·said about the object in the second group of
principles. Rational metaphysics until then; on the con·
trary, for:mulated actuality only as a complement to possibility
in the sense of conceivability: existentia as complementu.
m possibilitatis. But with this nothing is settled
about actuality itself. What could still be added to pQssibility
witlbin pure understanding is only the impossible,
but not the actual. The meaning of actuality is fulfilled
and bomc~ out for us only in the relation between repre·
senting aJld the encountering of the real of sensation.
Here w·e are at the point at which the misunderstanding
of the conception of reality begins. Because the reat
specifically as a given, alone bears out the actuality of an
object-people have wrongly identj.fied reality (Realitiit)
with actu:aJity (Wirklichlceit). Reality, however, is only a
condition for the givenness of an actuality, but not yet
the actuality of the actual.
·"3. Th2't which in its connection with the actual is de>
tennined in accordance with universal conditions of ex·
pericnce is (that is, exists as) necessary."
Kant conceives of necessity as detennination by that
which, out of agreement with the unity of experience as
such. est:ablisbes the connection with actuality. The
240 WHAT IS A THING?
necessity of an. object can be decided only in that the
representation obeys what is said in the third group of
principles concerning the constancy of the object. Ra ..
tional metaphysics, until then, on the contrary, under·
stood necessity merely as what cannot not be. However,
since existence is defined only as a complement of the
possible and this only as what is conceivable, this definition
of necessity also remained within the domain of
conceivability. The necessary is what is unthinkable as
non-existent ( unseiend). However, what we have to think
need not for this reason exist. We can never recognize the
existence of an object in its necessity at all, but always
only the existence of a state of an object in relation to
another.
Ia· Being as the being of the objects of experienc; ..
Modalities in relation to the power of cognition
'From this elucidation of the contents of the postulates,
which is synonymous with the essential definition of the
modalities, we gather that Ka~t. in defining the modeS
of being, at the same time delimited being to the being of
the object of experience. The merely logical clarifications
of possibility, actuality, necessity, as in rational met~
physics, are rejected. In short, being is no longer deter·
mined out of mere thought. From whence then? The recurring
formula "what agrees with," ''what is connected
with,'' is striking in the postulates. Possibility, actuality,
necessity are understood out of the relationship between
our capacity to know (an intuiting determined in accord·
~ce with thought) and the conditions of the possibility
of objects-conditions which lie in our knowing capacity
itself. ·
The modalities (possibility, actuality, and necessity)
add no content (Sachhaltiges) to the content (Sachhaltigkeit)
of the object, and yet they are a synthesis. They
put the object into a relationship to the conditions of its
Ktznt's Manner of Asking About the Thing 241
standing-against (Gegen-stehen ). These conditions, however,
are also those very ones of the letting-stand-against
( Gegenste.henlassen) of experience, and, therefore, of
the actions of the subject. The postulates, too, are synth~
tic prin.ciples, although not objective. but only subjectively
synthetic. This is to say that they do not put together
the content of the object, but they put the whole
nature of the object as determined by the three first
principles into its possible relations to the subject and to
its modes of intuitively-thought representing. The modalities
add to the concept of the object its relation to our
cognitive faculty. (A 234, B 289, N.K.'S., pp. 251 f.) Therefore,
also, the three modes of being correspond to the
fU'st three .groups of principles. What is asserted in these
presupposes the modalities. In this sense, the fourth
group of synthetic principles of pure understanding re·
mains superior in rank to the others. Conversely~ the
modalities are determined only in relation to what is posited
in the preceding principles.
g,. Tbe circularity of the proofs. and elucidations
Now it is clear that just like the proofs of the other
principles,. the elucidation of the postulates, too, moves in
a circle. \\fhy is· there this circular movement, and what
does it say?
The principles are to be proved as those propositions
which establish the possibility of an experience· of objects.
Ho~r are these propositions proven? It is done by
showing t1!lat these propositions themselves are possible
only on the! ground of the unity and agreement of the pure
conceptions of the understanding with the forms of intuition.
w:ith space and time. The unity of thought and
intuition i:s itself the essence of experience. The proof consists
in showing that the principles of pure understanding
are possible through that which they themselves
make possible, through the nature of experience. This i!.J
242 WHAT x·s A THING?
an obvious circle, and indeed a necessary one. The princi..
pies are proved by recourse to that whose arising they.
make possible, because these propositions are to bring to
light nothing else than this circularity itself; for this constitutes
the essence of experience.
In the concluding part of his work Kant says of the
principle of pure understanding that "it has the peculiar
character that it makes possible the very experience
which is its own ground of proof, and that in this expe~
ence it must always itself be presupposed'' (A 737, B 165~
N.K.S., p. 592). The principles are such propositionS
which ground their ground of proof and transfer this
grounding to the ground of proof. Expressed differently;
the ground which they lay, the nature of experience, is
not a thing present-at-band, to which we return and upoQ
which we then simply stand. Experience is in itself .a
circular happening through which what lies within the
circle becomes exposed (erof/net). This open (Offene).
however, is nothing other than the between (Zwischen)
-between us and the thing.
h. The Highest Principle of All Synthetic Judgm~ts.
The Between
What Kant hit upon and what he constantly tried tQ
grasp anew as the fundamental happening is that we h~
man beings have the power of knowing what is, which we
ourselves are not, even though we did not ourselves make
this what is. To be what is in the midst of an open vis+
vis what is, that is constantly strange. In Kant's formula·
tion this means to have objects standing against us as
they themselves, even though the letting encoun~ (das
Begegnen-lassen) happens through us. How is such possible?
Only in such a way that the conditions of the possi•
bility of experiencing (space and time as pure intuitionS
and the categories as pure concepts of the understanding)
are at the same time the conditions of the standinB:"
against of the objects of exp·erience.
Kant's Manner of Asking About the Thing 243
What is expressed in this way !Cant has established as
the highest principle of all synthetiC judgments. It now
becomes clear what the circularity in the proof of the
principles means. It means nothing else than this: Fundamentally
these principles always express only the highest
principle, but in such a way that in their belonging t~
gether they explicidy cite all that which belongs to the
full content of the nature of experience and the nature
of an object.
The chief difficulty in understanding this basic section
of the C;ritique of Pure Reason and the whole work lies in
the fact that we approach it from out everyday or scien-tific
mode of thinking and read it ·in that attitude. Our attention
is directed either toward what is said of the object
itself or toward what is explained about the mode in
which it is. experienced. What is decisive, however, is
neither to pay attention only to the one nor only to the
other, n4lr to both together, but to recognize and to know:
t. tha.t we must always move in the between, between
man and thins;
2. tha.t this between exists only while we move in
it;
3. thaLt this between is not like a rope stretching &om
the thinJi to man, but that this between as an anticipation
(VorgriJf) reaches beyond the thing and similarly back
behind ·us. Reaching-before (Vor-griff) means thrown
back (Ruck-wurf).
Therefore, when, from the first sentence onward, we
read the Critique of Pure Reason in this attitude, from the
start cvc~rything moves into a different light.
Conclusion
We have sought to press forward to the doctrine of the
principl•es, because in this center of the Critique of Pure
Reason ;the question about the thing is newly p\lt and answered.
We said earlier that the question of the thing is a
historicul one; now we see more clearly in what sense
244 WHAT IS A THING?
this is the case. Kant's questioning about the thing asks
about intuition and thought, about experience ·and its
principles, i.e., it asks about man. The question "What is
a thing?" is the question "Who is man?" That does not
mean that things become a human product (Gemiichte),
but, on the contrary, it means that man is to be under-.
stood as he who always already l~ps J?eyond things, but
in such a way that this leapiOg:beyond is possible only
while things encounter and so precisely remain themselves-
while they send us back behind ourselves and our
surface. A dimension is opened up in Kant's question
about the thing which lies between the thing and man,
which reaches out beyond things and back behind man.
ANALYSIS
In the pages to follow, four main topics will be discussed:
( 1 ) the sort of questions that are philosophical (to explain
such questions as "What is a thing?"); (2) the text
itself, dealinJg with sections A, in which the question
"What is a thing?" is raised; B-1, which examines the
basic assumption system involved in modem science; and
B-11, which presents the way Kant fundamentally altered
the grounds •on which this scientific assumption system
was based and the limits within which it can be valid;
( 3) the relationship of Heidegger to Kant; ( 4) the later
Heidegger and future philosophy.
Heidegger's first section (A) is preparatory and is designed
to give! the reader a fresh start, freeing him from
some of the p•reconceptions he is likely to have. Although
written as a simple common-sense discussion, it contains
all of Eleidegger's major points. This analysis will
attempt to relate these points as raised in section A with
their carefully detailed analysis in sections B-1 and B-11.
However, before examining the text itself, we must discuss
the meaning of the question "What is a thing?", and,
247
248 WHAT ISA 1·HING?
as this question is one version of the sort of question
philosophy always asks, we must briefly discuss what
sort of questions are philosophical.
1. PHJWSOPHICAL QUESTIONS
The task of philosophy differs from that of science~ for~
unlike science. philosophy examines not our conclusions
but the basic conceptual models we employ-the kind of
concepts and ordering patterns we use. Philosophy concerns
not the explanation of this ot that but questions
such as "What, really, is an explanation?''
For example, is something explained when it is divided
into parts and if we can tell how the parts behave? This
is but one type of explanation. It works fairly well for a
car (although it does not tell what makes it run),less well
for a biological cell (whose "parts" are not alive an~ do
not explain its life), and very poorly for explaining per·
sonality (what are the "parts" of a person?). Or, choosing
another of the many types, has something been explained
when we feel that we "understand" it because we baye
been shown how it fits into some larger context ~r
broader organization? These questions, philosophic questions,
are not designed to determine the explanation of
this or that, but to discover what an explanation is. Yet,
as we have seen. there are many different kinds of ex·
planations. In any one case, which shall we use? Or should we try to use them all, and, if so, when and with what advantages
and pitfalls? How is our choice among these
varied explanations to be made? Should it depend on the
field in which we work, on what we want an explanation
for, or on the style of the times? ·.
When we ask questions of this sort, we seem to be
talking about nothing in particular; as Heidegger points
out, such philosophic issues at first seem to be empty.
Yet, they very basically affect whatever we study, for,
Analysis 249
dependin;g upon which mode of ;;tpproach we use, different
qu,estions- and hypotheses will be formulated, different
ex·periments set up, different illustrations cited,
different arguments held to be sound. and different conclusions
·reached. Much in our conclusions about anything
con:aes not from the study of the things but from the
philosophical decisions implicit in the way we start.
Ideally, a clear division could be made between what is
asserted of the things and what is only characteristic of
one's preiferred type of explaining. But these two are so
intermesbed and interdependent that the very research,
find·ings, und objective results of one approach will seem
to those holding another approach as completely irrelevant
or poorly asked about and answered from start to
finish. It would be convenient to be able to say, "These
aspects I found by studying my subject matter, and about
them you must accept what I sayi whereas those other
aspects of my results stem merely from the sort of approach
I ~dways use, from 'the way I slice things/ and so
you needn't accept that side of my conclusions." But the
effects of one's approach cannot be separated out. Even
what we a:sk, the questions with which we begin (as well
as every subsequent step and finding), is already a result
of, and is formulated within, a certain context and
a certain v1ay of conceptualizing things.
Since it is philosophy's task to· discuss, clarify. and
decide abeout such choices, philosophy cannot be based
on a study of how the things are in order to see what
approach is most suitable. How we find the things to be
already d€:pends upon our approach. Thus, the question
••What is a thing?" is one way of putting the basic ques·
lion of approach.
The "thi.ng," as we have things today, is a certain sort of
e."<planato1ry scheme, a certain sort of approach to anything
studlicd. Heidegger finds this approach current in
both science and ordinary common sense. It is an approach
thut renders whatever we study as some thing in
250 WHAT IS A THING?
space, located over tbere, subsisting separate from and
over against us and having certain properties of its own.
It is as obvious as "that orange.colored chair over there,"
or "an atom," "a cell," ·~a self." ''a sense datum," .. a body.';
Although Einstein's physics has changed this thing.
model somewhat, Heidegger views Einstein's theory as a.
more complex modification of the same basic thing-model
(20, 15).* We assume the thing so naturally that only a
far-reaching discussion such as Heidegger's can make us
realize how constantly we approach everything in this
way, how this approach came about, and how a different
approach is possible. These are the sort of aims that are
the task of philosophy.
Heidegger tells us that science begins and can begin
without explicitly examining its basic approach. SCience
begins with contemporary problems, which arise in the
context of bow the people of the time approach things.
Although philosophic questions are often decided in
science, this occurs only implicitly.ln proceeding further,
science makes further decisions, but these are made
through action.
Fashions in science change, and, therewith, much seemingly
important work becomes irrelevant. But, since it is
not the task of science to examine its implicit decisions.
directly, it can begin without preliminaries. Heidegger
argues that philosophy, however, cannot simply begin. It
asks a question ''with which nothing can be started"
(2, 2). Therefore, the question. of the thing is a question
with which one cannot begin. Thus, we are faced with a
dilemma: Since philosophy cannot simply start without
abandoning its task, which is to examine how we are to
begin, how we are to approach and conceptualize; how,.
then, can philosophy ever begin and proceed at all?
* In this annlysis the fii"Sl reference given will be to the English
translation of What Is A Thi11g?, and the second, in italics, to the
German text.
Analysis 251
Another wa.y to put this dilemma is to talk about "experience."
Peclple often say that they want their knowledge
to fit ( o1r to be based on) experience. But different
modes of study involve different sorts of "experience."
For instance, one might know something from reading
a dial on a cornplex experimental apparatus, or one might
know something from culturally learned common-sense
observation. \Nhen these and other sorts of .,experience,.
occur they already make sense, even before interpretations
are fornnulated. The physicist's dial reading is obviously
an "experience" into which much thought has
already gone, and common-sense objects around us are
also experienced only with interpretations already in
them. What w·e appeal to, check against. and call "experience"
is always already organized and cut up, defined and
made. Thus, philosophy's problem is not solved by basing
philosophy on experienCe. Once we have chosen how to
have "experiemce" (and on what selected and shaped
aspects of it our statements can be "based''), what philosophy
must first examine has already been decided and
concluded. Heence, the basic philosophical choices and
decisions are 1already settled in any settled acceptance of
,. experience."
So far thesf~ have been presented as jf they were quite
free "choices/' as tf one could adopt any sort of method,
type of concept, sense of explanation, form of thing, and
type of 14expe:rience.'' But this is not so. In Heidegger's
view we cann.ot today, for instance, ignore our mathematics
and science and embark on some new beginning
that bears no relation to science (95, 73). Nor can we
ignore our cornmon-sense perspective. One is always in a
given situation, at a particular pass in history. The choices
confronting u:s are choices in our current historical context.
Although a decision to assume our present context relieves
us of \\'hat could otherwise seem an endless and
arbitrary relativity of choices, Heidegger's decision to
252 WHAT IS AT HING?
study this context is made in order to put it into question,
to reopen questions that at present appear settled. In this
examination Hcideggcr sees the answer to our dilemma of
how philosophy can start at all without abandoning its
basic task, how it can examine basic approach and not
simply fall into the existing approach.
While we cannot accept our present approach unexamined,
neither can we simply reject it, for in rejecting it we
would still be standing in it and we would still be using it,
constantly, implicitly, in spite of ourselves. We must,
then, examine this approach as we have it, realizina that
it has developed as a series of answers to a series of
questions asked long ago, settled long ago, and now no
longer asked. Our now unquestioned, implicit approach
was once a new answer to a question that was then open.
If we find our way back to those questions, we will not
only see them as live questions and as they were answered
at that time, but we will be, thereby, in a position to an ..
swer them differently. Regaining these questions as live
and open is the only way to get behind our unexamined
assumptions, to see how they are now .our basis, and to·
change them (49-50, 38). Heidegger calls this ;~reopen·
ing" a question, or taking a question that is now "quies·
cent" and "setting [it] into motion'' again ( 49. 38),.
In order to move beyond the current context. the cur·
rent way we see ''things" and "experience," the way we
have knowledge and questions, Heidegger presents the
historical steps and philosophical decisions that brought
us to the current approach. He reopens decisions that
were made and are now implicit (are now "happening")
in our assumed approach. Philosophy thus makes the
current, jmplicit context e%plicit and thereby prov~des the
opportunity to carry further, add to, or change "things"
(49-50, 38)! Thus, Heidegger says that only philosophy
builds the roads that create and alter what things are.
But does he not say tlu\t science and ordinary commonsense
living in any culture do this also (65-66, 100; 50,
78)? Yes, but they do it implicitly. Philosophy adds a
Analysis 253
different power in explicating implicit decisions, thereby
reopenin1g them and posing them for further decision ( 10.
41, 53-54: 8, 31, 41).
Heidegger tries to reopen some of these crucial deci·
sions that made things and experience as we now have
them, dc::cisions set by Plato and Aristotle, Galileo and
Newton,. Leibniz and Kant. The book reopens especially
those ba:sic cultural decisions that at first were involved
chiefly b:1 modem science. although they also came to
determb:te how we now view and live with and in anything.
Thus far we have seen what philosophy does and
how, for Heidegger, it is possible only as it examines its
own role· in history.
But are we not today quite aware of the thing-model.
and its limitations? Is there now already a sufficiently
widesprc~ad critical attitude of this sort? Since the publication
c>f Sein und Zeit in 1927, an entire generation of
thinkers--scientists, authors, artists-has lived and writ ..
ten in thee climate that Heidegger (with Dilthey and Husser)
just before him) helped create. Because of this inte11ectual
climate, nearly aJl thinkers since the thirties
have bee!D at least indirectly influenced by Heidegger and
his immE:diate predecessors. We owe to Heidegger much
of current thought, with it$ emphasis on getting beyond
mere models by appealing to the wider context of ordi·
nary living.
In reading What Is A Thing? (which was first published
in Germany in 1962, although it consists of lectures given
in 1935 ),1t we do much more than reinforce today's general
attitude that science consists of man-made models within
I By 19315 Heidegger had already courageously withdrawn from
support of Nazism. which had at first seemed to him a hopeful revolt
against rationalized. technologized culture. He withdrew at a
time when very few could see ahead, and his early support should
not be remembered without also remembering his early with·
d1·awal. On the other hand, why this type of philosophy was not a
better guide for his political decisions and how this type of phi·
losophy rdates to political allegiance, are certainly questions to
reopen!
254 WHATJSATHJNG?
a human world. We cannot remain content with this menl
attitude, this implicit assumption ahou.t science. Only if
we see an exact analysis of science in the human contex~
if that is spelled out, explicated, can we move further.
We must go behind our own current climate of thought)
which Heidegger helped to create, and examine Heideg:.
ger's exact analysis of the thing-model. The thing-model
is, despite our current attitudes, still second nature to. us.
In the following pages I will be more exact and will a to
tempt to state some main points that should make the
reading of Heidegger's book easier and more enjoyable
(for the way in which the book reveals and delineates certain
major aspects basic to our thinking is extremely
enjoyable, once barriers to its understanding have been
overcome).
2. THB TEXT
Section A
In citing the housemaid who laughed at the anci'enti
philosopher Thales when he fell into the well while ob:
serving the stars, Heidegger agrees that philosophy catii
look like a laughable endeavor of no particular use; while
searching for the ultimate grounds of things one can
easily fall into a well, and in a well one falls a long time
before hitting the ground. (We are searching for the·
"ground" or basis of how anything appears and is approached
and studied.) Also, the maid is right in that it i&
best to look carefully at the ordinary things around us
before looking far away.
As we shall sec later, Heidegger goes beyond Kant ancl
other philosophers, for he does begin with the ordinary
things around us. To be more accurate, be begins with us
and the things around us, as we are among them at this
time in history. Kant does not do this, nor, in Heideg-
Analysis 255
gcr's view. do tht~ natural sciences. Throughout the book ..
therefore, Heidegger adds the larger human context to the
discussion of Kant and of science.
We come today upon a scene in which "things" are held
to be objects ~round us, separable and movable in space.
But, already at the start ·of the discussion ( 4-6, 3-5),
Heidegger prepa:res for his own larger context, which in·
valves humans as well as things. Thus. he sets up three
sorts of things: (I) the objects around us, (2) our human
attitudes and pr:oeedures, and (3) the totality of these
two in interdependence together. And, as he says later, the
third is really first (16, 74; 12, 57). Within this larger con·
text, our inquiry here will center on the things we find
around us. In order to grasp how these seemingly independent
things c::ome to be as we ordinarily find them
around us we will have to concern ourselves also with our
own human spec!ch and attitudes and with the context
that encompasses both us and them.
Heidegger uses such phrases as "the being of what is''
or "the thingness of the thing," and means by that the
basic way (mod•el, approach, framework) in which we
meet these thinJJS· This is not some mysterious, addi·
lionaJ, floating "JJeing," for it is only the mode of being of
these things arolmd us, how they are (9, 7). But that involves
more than they do. What they are also involves the
context in which., together with us, they come to be the
way they are for us.
Hcidegger next discusses the difference between the
things of common sense and those same things as ren·
dercd by scienct!. Why does he discuss this difference
here? He wants hl make clear to us that the things we run
.into are not simply given, as they seem, but have always
already involved a .certain "approach," which could be
different. Once \Ve note these two very different ways in
which we render things, we can no longer consider the
things according to either as simply given, independent
of us.
256 WHAT IS A THING?
The ways in which science and everyday common senie
present ''things" arc not at all the same. For example, in
ordinary terms, the sun "rises" and ''sets," while science
says that it docs not ( 13, 10 ). What is the relation between
these two things-the thing of science and the thing of
common observation? Heidegger finds that an under·
standing of "an original reference to things is missing''
these days between the things as rendered by science ant\
the ordinary things .around us (41, 31 ). To relate these
two current approaches of ours we would have to \IDder.stand
how approaches come to be. It is one of the tasks
of this book to show this, and to show the common origin·
of these two.
Heidegger says that ordinary things are always partie>
ulars, this one or that one, whereas science studies only
universalities (IS, 11-12). He asks: Does modem scien€e
drop out particularity? The common sense things around.
us are always this ane or that one, but, for science, any
specific thing or event must be "derivable" from general
theories. We say that we lack an explanation (scientific
account) of a thing as long as we cannot yet derive it•
nature and occurrence from universal, basic theoreticat
postulates (axioms, premises, principles, Grundsiitt.e, postulates
). This is the basic "axiomatic" character of mod•
em science with which Heidegger deals in detail in the
latter part of this book. In contrast,. any ordinary thing is
always this one, a singular, particular thing.
Heidegger next shows that the particularity of things
seems to depend completely on their space and time, that
each is here or there, now or then. If two things are alike
( 15-16,23: 12, 17), this one is different from that one only
because it is here now, while the other is there, llr is here
later. It is space and time that make ordinary thingS
particulars. Here he poses a question that he deals with
only later: Scientific propositions, too, concern events in
space and time, and not only generalizations. How does
Analysis 257
scienae use space and time so that events can be both
specifically determined and derivable from universal
theory (111. 129; 86, 101)?
Kant assumed that human space and time are those of
Newton's physics (77, 59), and he showed how Newton's
fl absolute'' space and time are really generated in the
way m.an thinks about and perceives any lawful and specific
object. (Later we shall see exactly how this is done.)
While Heidegger's notion of man is fuller than Kant's
Newtonian man, he, too, derives space and time in the
same basic way as did Kant: Space and time are general
ed in the encounter between man and the things that
humans point out. locate, and make specific.
But Heidegger asks: Is space really involved in the
very n:take-up of specific things? Is not space merely a
system. of -external relations obtaining between things?
He shc•ws ( 19, 198; 15, 153) that even if we break a thing
lo get to the space "inside" we find external relations
between its parts, bits, and pieces. Space seems to be
not really "in" the thing but only the "possibility" of arrangentents
of its parts (in, out, next to, etc.). How does
this possibility of spatial structuring come into what a
thing is?
"Possibility" is an important concept in this book and
always refers to how our basic approach first makes
things: it is our possible mode of approach that makes
it "pos.sible" for things to be as they are encountered, located,
and found by us (21, 189; 16, 148). The thing is
given t.here, over against us. This encounter's externality
is an arranging that ·makes ~nd gets into the thing. And
just as we did not see space in the thing directly, we
certainly never sec or perceive time as such. or in things.
Yet. only space and time are in the particularity of each
thing.
To what does Heidegger trace this characteristic of
things. that they are always ... this one" or "that one" (and,
'(
258 WHAT IS A THING?
thus,.to what does he trace space and time, since space and
time lend things their particularity)? He traces the thing's
character of being always •'this one" to the thing's relation
to us or our relation to the thing. We point at things and
s. o call them "this one" or "that one- " (24-25, 202; 18-19,
157).
Thus, again (as he did when he set up the three kinds of
., things''), Heidegger invokes the larger. ordinary, human
context in which we and things appear together. In that
interplay between us and things, space and time are
generated. •
Heidegger argues that words such as "this" and "that,''
the demonstrative pronouns, should not be called .. pro"
nouns, that is, substitutes for nouns. The use of the word$
.,this" and "that" is the most original and earliest mode
of saying-anything and thereby selecting and determiniD8
~ thing (25, 1'9). Only after our interplay with things dd
they come to have a resulting nature of their own. T~
noun becomes possible only on the basis of our pointin~
Our demonstrative definitions precede more developed
definitions, i.e .• 4'things'' arise only in the context of theit
relation to us and our pointing them out.
And so we arrive at what might be called the ma~
theme of the book, the "between." Heidegger is not saying
that a thing is something subjective. "What a 'this.' is does
not depend upon our caprice and our pleasure." What it is
does depend upon us, but ·"it also equally depends upon
the things" (26, 20; also 24·3, 188). This "between" is not
as though first we and things could have existed separately
and then interacted. Rather, what a person is is
always already a having things given, and a thing is al•
ready something that encounters. .
As we have seen, what a thing is (for instance, the sun).
depends on whether we take the thing of science or the
thing of common sense. As Heidegger phrases it. "The
things stand in different truths ( 14. 11 )."What a thing is
Analysis 259
always depends on some interplay with us, upon some
truth in which it stands.
But Heidegger never speaks of mere viewpoints con·
cerning what things are. He is concerned with concrete
situations, with things we run into., work on, and use (both
the common sense things and the scientific airplanes we
fly). Thut the airplanes· we build actually fly is no mere
viewpoint! It is througb·action in concrete situations that
"things'·' come to be acted on and taken as of a certain
chara:actc:~r. The character of things is therefore no mere
viewpobtt, but is made in our ;~ctions and in the situations.
With our approach we create6 And by explicating the implicit
approach, philosophy can reopen old decisions and
make further crucial decisions that have equally concrete
effects on what things are. Conversely, only in perceiving
and acting on things do we constitute ourselves as humans,
just as only thereby do the things become things.
Heide.gger now illustrates this interplay "between" man
and things with some examples from Hegel. Hegel showed
that the seemingly obvious and solid things, 'fthis here"
and "this now," change constantly and are relative to us ..
Space and time are generated in the interplay between us
and thin1gs. The "this here now'' depends on me and is a
different "this here now" when I tum. The mere ~'here
now" is not enough io make a "thing." It lacks a lasting
truth and is only its changing relation to us. Thus, the
tempora.l and spatial aspects of this interplay 4'between"
us and tbings is not alone sufficient to determine a thing.
A second major consideration must be taken up (32, 24).
This i!s our opportunity, therefore, to discuss the two
major considerations along which everything in this book
is divided: (a) sensation and (b) concepts, or, more basically,
(a) givenness and (b) collection in a class, or (a)
particulars and (b) universals: (a) the here.now "this
one" and (b) "what it is."
What something is is always a universal (many other
260 WHAT lS A THING?
things can be the same •'what").lf we call "this one" here
now a "cat," we thereby take and know it as the same as
many other things not here now, which are also cats. "Cat''
is thus a universal or a class. What is a cat? We can delin~
cate the traits that make something a. cat, and each of
these traits is also a universal: many other things (other
cats and still other things) are furry, or arc animals, etc.
These are "concepts" in Kant's sense of that word. For
Kant (A320, 8377), a concept is a "characteristic mark"
that defines the members of a class. Concepts are commonalities;
they are the same wherever and whenever
they occur. A thing is a ••this here now" that ''bears" such
universal "traits."
Heidegger calls time and space (as we just left them;
above) the "realm" (32, i4) in which things encounter us
(now, and from over there), in which things can be
"given" as over against us. Concepts, however, organize.
They stabilize the flow of sentience; they make it into
something. They bring it to a lasting stand. Only both
make a thing. An object in German is a Gegenstand .. literally,
a .standing-against ( 137, 140, 184, 190; 107-110, 144 ..
148).
1
Both givenness and concepts are really interplays "between"
us and things, for given ness is 1 heir mode of encountering
us, and the concepts of traits are our way of
determining and defining thetn. Thus, both givenness and
concepts are our ways. And both are the thing's ways.
Yet it is clear that both belong to us only in regard to
how givenness and concepts make things, and belong to
things only as encountering us.
But to what does Heidegger trace this conceptual traitconstitution
of things?· He traces it (37, 28) to tl\e structure
of our speaking to each other about a situation (much
as, earlier, he traced the time-space realm of the particularity
of ''this" or "that" thing to our pointing things
out to each other).
Traditionally in philosophy, a sentence had been artAnalysis
261
alyzed as a connection between a su~ject and a predi·
cate. :Heideggcr puts the sentence into the larger context
of a ):terson's expressing himself to others about a situation
iin which facets of the situation are stated, and
something (the predicate) is asserted about some facet
(the subject). What is said, the predicate, becomes the
"trait:s" oF a "thing." The subject of the sentence is the
thing, not as seen or perceived but as hypothesized as one
"unde:r" its many traits. The subject "bears" the traits~
This atncient mode-·of the underlying subject, as familiar
and pervasive as it is, seems foolish, and its widespread
use mlUSt be puzzling unless it. is seen in tbe light ·of its
derivsttion from the context of uttering something in
speech~ Of course, once it is seen in this way, one is hardly
inclin•ed to assume that this model is simply a given thing
that has this structure of its own accord and apart from
us. In Heidegger's view, the underlying trait-bearing
thing was modeled after the sentence.
Thu.s. we have the second of the two major considerations:
the thing as bearer of traits (or classes), this, too,
derivilng from within an interplay ''between" man and
things.
It if; vital that givenness and concepts are really seen
as tWtl different considerations. In modem times it is
a Kantian contribution to insist upon the difference.
Dcsca1rtes, Leibniz, and many others before Kant .did notview
perception and thought as really different. Perception
"'as viewed as still-unclarified thought. It could be
wholl)' analyzed and reduced to thought units. But that
meant that there was no realm of givenness of here-now
"this cme" and "that one." Hence, Leibniz had to hold the
"principle of indiscernibles": Two things cannot be alike
in every one of their conceptualizable traits. They would
be only one thing (23, 17). For Leibniz, only traits, not
space and time, could distinguish two things. Why does
this mtatter here? Because that view gave all power to
axiomatic concepts and none to givenness. In that view,
262 WHAT IS A THING?
reason determines everything and depends only on itself
(a rational, axiomatic, mathematical-physical system).
That was the Renaissance way uthings" were. Heidegger
wants to show that it was this limitless power of pure
reason that Kant "limits" in his Critique. Kant limits the
rational by showing how concepts are only the ways in
which sensory givens go into the make-up of the things
we experience. These have been some of the main problems
which Heidegger discusses in the first section and
upan which he builds the latter sections of the book.
Even though it seems so .,natural," the "thing" is. a
historical product (37, 28). Things would not need to
be as they are, over there, movable in space, lasting
through time. each thing with its traits (universals) held,
carried, and borne by an individuating space-time posi ..
tion.
"That orange chair over there'' is a historical product.
It is something made. A furniture manufacturer made it
along certain lines of use and taste that a designer had
before he designed the chair (71-72, 55). And the "mere"
observer is also a maker, bu,t in a special, narrowed case
that occurs in a setting of cultural making. As its characteras
a chair is made, so also are its general characteristics
as a thing made, along the model of movable units in
space and time. a model that the physicists first made, i.e.,
postulated axiomatically.
We might wish simply to reject this model of the thing
because it is a ''mechanistic," lifeless, rigid model. There
is a current tendency among some· groups to denigrate
scientific conceptual methods without actually grasping
their nature, and to reject pseudo-explanatory models
altogether. In line with this tendency we might wisJt to
reject the thing-model in favor of a simple appeal to the
ordinary, or in favor of a reaffirmation of life and human
creativity. But if we do only that we will fail to move
beyond the thing-model, because without examining It
fully, we will not notice how il pervades the way we think,
Analysis 263
1neet, a1zd deal with almost any thing. Thus, we 11,1ight reject
the m•echanistic, thinglike ways of thought where we
do see thern clearly, and yet we will operate with them and
with nothing else in all we see and do. As Heidegger
argues, only by studying the model in depth, only by apprcdating
the questions it answered (putting what it
decided into question anew) can we reaiJy get beyond it.
Heidegger gives some examples (SJ-52, 39): We tend
lo approac:h poems as things· and thereby make the study
·of poetry "'dreary." We fail to·understand plants and animals
because we tend to approach them as .,things," i.e.,
as movablt! bodies in space, as the orange chair over there.
We have become so accustomed to this ''thing" that we
approach anything as a separable ''thing" over there. A
plant is considered as a "living thing," as basically a
thing or body with mysterious added-on traits of life.
Works of art are considered "things" with aesthetic traits
somehow added on. Similarly, we often view personality,
and even ourselves, as a "personality structure," or a
"self" (a$ if it were a thing, inside), or as having "personality
C<l•ntents" or ·~personality traits·~~ if a person
were a structure with parts, a container With things in·
side, or a subject bearing traits.
A thing has a separate location in space, and hence we
impute a s~eparate location to anything we approach as
a thing. This model of the thing leads to a great many
separations: we separate subjects and objects, inside and
outside, fe:elings and situations, individuals and interpersonal
relationships, individual and community, the
time momc!nt now and time a moment later, symbol and
knower. beady and mind, etc. These many divisions are not
separate issues, since each involves the same type of conceptual
construct of things, each as separately located, a
unit "thing" existing here now in a certain unit of space
amd at a "tnoment," i.e., a unit bit of time. Ti.me, too, is
conceived us made up of bit things, units, moments. Why?
IL is not bec:ause we somehow perceive and study time and
264 WHAT IS A THING?
find it to be such. One does not perceive time as such.
We conceive time as moments because our approach is.
one of thing units.
Section B-1
Here, Heidegger traces the thing-model's history. We·
will likely take for granted that "space" is everywliere the·
same until we realize that the notion of such a space was
lacking among the Greeks. Instead, they thought that
each thing had its own proper place, and that the move ..
ment of a thing was always back to its proper pl~ce. Unless
externally restrained; an earthen thing tended "down•
ward" and a fiery one "upward." Each thing thus tended
to move in a certain way of its own accord, and this was.
termed each thing's "internal principle of motion.'• -& .... - ........
things were not mere bodies that had to. be moved.
allowed to do so, they moved themselves back to
own places ( 83-84, 64-65 ). Thus, there were Ai+IFAr•'"'" ...
kinds of places in the Greek model. We realize that
own everywhere.uniform space, too, is very much
model, perhaps better than the Greek, perhaps not, but at
any rate not self-evident.
In the Newtonian model, just as in the Greek, the natu
of space is related to what thing and motion are. For us.
there is no "internal principle of motion" by which a
body moves itself. Rather, bodies are moved, put
motion only by something else. and they remain in motion
until stopped by something else. All our "principles of
motion" are "outside principles": something else outside
the body is always posited to explain why a body
comes into motion. Our laws of motion are the •me for
all places, and, hence. there is "space." everywhere just
the same. Of course the earthen things, when allowed to
can still be observed to move "downward" just as
did in ancient Greece. But how we grasp what things
differs. We posit gravitational attraction outside the
thing to explain why it moves.
Analysis 265
When the different motions of different things are explained
by different outside causes, all "bodies" (things)
are vie\ved as fundamentally the same in their basic
nature. Of course they do not all look or act the same,
but then we think of them as made up of little '*things"
(a few types, each always the same: atoms, electrons,
protons), and we explain all differences as different arrangemE:
nts of these same things. What, where, and when
anythinu is or moves will always· be derivable according
to the s;ame basic principles.
The \\rorld is conceived as made of arrangements of
uniform units of matter and space (92-93. 7 1-72). If two
constellations are made of the same parts and· in the
same pa.ttems, exactly the same events wiD occur. And
if time and space do not make two otherwise identical
constellations different (as for Leibniz they do not), such
two thin1gs would really be only one thing.
Heidegg~r t~rms this aspect of the scientific approach
its basic:: "mathematical" character.. He calls modem
science Jnathematical. not because it so widely employs
mathem;ltics but because this basic plan of uniform units
makes it possible to quantify everything one studies. It
makes everything amenable to mathematics.
Heidetmer discusses two related reasons for calling the
basic scientific approach umathematical," i.e., two reasons
r or mathematics' becoming such an important tool in this
approach: First, because it is a model of uniform units
and henc:e makes uniform measurement possible every·
where, and. second, because it is "axiomatic''-that is
it is posited (as an axiom in geometry). Furthermore,
Hcide.ggE:r argues that the model copies our own thought
procedur-es. Its uniform units 'are uniform thought steps
transfonned into a ground plan postulated as the basic
structurt~ of things. Here these two lines of argument
will be discussed in turn:
1 ) Th€: approach to things as consisting of unifonn
units makes mathematics applicable to things: numbers
are com~.asitions of uniform units. Seventeen consists of
266 WHAT IS A THING?
the same units as fourteen, only there are three more of
them. Since the units are the same, it would not matter
which three of the seventeen units were considered to
be three more .than fourteen. There is a serial procedur~
employed in countin1, In this procedure we obtain various
numbers because we always keep in mind the 1,1Dits al•
ready counted. Our counting "synthesizes" (puts together)
fourteen and another, another, and another. We
keep what we have with us as we add another same unit.
Our own continuity as we count gets us to the higher
number. As Kant phrased it, without the unity of the "I
think," there would be only the one unit counted now;
and no composition of numbers. We get from fourteen
to seventeen by taking fourteen with us as we go on to
I add another, another, and another. Thus, our activity of
thinking provides both the series of uniform steps ancl
the uniting of them into quantities. These units and
numbers are our own notthes, our own "another," ourr
own unity. and our own steps. Why do two plus two
equal four? The steps are always the same: hence, the
second two involves steps of the same sort as the firs!
two, and both are the same uniform steps as counting t()
four. Thus, the basic mathematical composing gives
science its uniform unitlike "things" and derivable com•
positions (70-7!, 54). Therefore, everything so viewed
becomes amenable to mathematics (93-94, 72).
2) But Heidegger terms the modem mode) of things
.,mathematical" (97, 74) for a second reason. He argues
that ••mathematical" means "axiomatic": the basic nature
of things has been posited as identical to the steps of
our own proceeding. our own pure reasoning. The law~
of things are the logical nt.~essity of reason's own,steps
(102, 75) posited as laws of nature. It is this that mak~:
the model "mathematical" and explains why mathemati~
acquired such an important role. The everywhere-eq\lal!
units of the space of uniform motion of basically uni•.
form bodies are really only posited axioms. They are thfl!
unifonn steps of pure, rational thought, put up as axioms:
Analysis 267
of nature.. Descartes had said it at its "coldest" ( 101, 78)
and most extreme: Only a method of reducing everything
to the clear and distinct steps of rational thinking grasps
nature.
Is not such an approach simply unfounded? Everything
may follow from the·starting assumptions, but what
are they based upon? How can that be a valid method?
Heideg~r says that the axiomatic method lays its own
ground (98, 75). ~He thus gives the term "axiomatic" a
meaning ilt does not always have: he makes it reflexive
(as Desaljrtes' method was) ... Axiomatic" means not only
to postula~te axioms and then deduce &om them; it does
not refer to just any unfounded assumptions one might
posit and deduce from. Rather. Heidegger emphasizes that
the axioms that rational thought posits assert the nature
of rational theught itself. Axiomatic thought posits itself
as the world's outline. It is- based on itself. It creates the
model of the world, not only by bl.lt as its own steps of
thought. As we have seen, it is rational thought that has
uniform unit steps and their composits, logical necessity
and sc> forth. The axiomatic ground-plan of nature is
simply tbe plan of the nature of rational thought asserted
of Jlature. This, then, is the basic "mathematical"
character of modem science. It is founded on the "axiomatic.,
me:thod of "pure reason," which; as we shaD see,
Kant retaiins but limits.
Heidegger now shows the extent to which science's
axiomatic thought-plan had reigned. Even God was subject
to it. Philosophically explicated (Descartes and
Leibniz), the lawful character of nature meant that God's
thinking (the thinking that creates nature) was axiomatic,
1ogiical thought. The power of axiomatic thought
is thus limitless. It creates nature. And so it was held that
God himself could not act otherwise than be does and
that he is s.ubservient to logical thought. Nature could not
possibly bte otherwise than along the lines of that which r ollows logically.
Hcidegg•er recalls that medieval· philosophy had be268
WHAT IS A THING?
queathed three different main topics of philosophy: God
(theology), world (cosmology), and man (psychology)
( 111, 86), which are similar to Heidegger' s three sorts
of "things" (6, 5). All three now became determined by
man's axiomatic thought. There was thus a "rational
theology," a "rational psychology/' and a "rational cosmology."
Reason was limitless. Using pure reason, man
could conclude not only about man, world, and God but
about what was possible and impossible in any possible
reality. This unlimited power of pure reason leads to
Kant's task of setting its limits. We must notice, however,
not only the vast extent of this power and the eVident
need to limit it but that this power is foqnded on the role
that thought has in generating the basic scientific groundplan,
unity, and lawfulness of things! Kant limits the
power of reason only by showing more exactly how its
power is legitimately founded. He shows how thought
legitimately participates in the formation of anything we
experience. But first, Heidegger prepares for his discussion
of Kant by reopening the question of the time: Why
is the axiomatic model applicable to nature? Heidegger
shows the vast role that came to be assigned to rational
thought. Then Kant limits it by showing the roles of
thinking in the experience of things, the generating of
space, time, unitst the unity of anything, and the lawfulness
of events.
We recall Heidegger's earlier discussion of the need for
the thing to be an utrderlyi'Jg "bearer of traits." A person's
"this here now" is always changing. Something must stand
steady: it is the thing, which underlies all its visible and
changing traits. This view goes back to Aristotle. for
whom the thing was analogous to the subject of the
sentence and the traits were the predicates. The Greek
term for matter means "what underlies," and its Latin
translation is "subject." Thus, already for the Greeks, the
thing as the underlying matter was viewed in terms of
the subject tcJ which predicates are tied in thought.
Analysis 269
Wit]~ the rise of modern science the axiomatic method
of purely logical steps of thought has replaced the underlying
1natter that holds the traits together and explains
how tihey change. (For instance, in Descartes' example·
(Meditations, II). a piece of wax is first white and then
charred. The scientific explanation requires that the wax
really be an underlying analytical framework. Both the
percei,ved white aild charred must be reduced to these
underlying thougbt-dimen$ions.)
Heidegger points to the ·Change in meaning that the
word .,subject" underWent from being "what underlies"
as the subject of the sentence and the matter of the thing
to its Jnodern meaning as the "person'' and "subjective"
t'hougbt. The thing that underlies is now our own thought!
For Kant, too, the unity of things and of space and
time (in fact, all necessary connective unity) comes from
.,1 think." If there were not a single thinker and perceiver.~
thoughts and perceptions would be isolated: if ,you both
saw arad tasted a lump of sugar, it would be as though
you sa·w white and someone else tasted sweet. The oneness
of our thinking is "what underlies" (as, for example,
when we count units we take them along and thereby
unite tlhem as we·go on counting). Thus, the subject that
"bears~'' the traits or predicates is the thought unity of
the experiencer.
But this "I think" is not an object; it is only the unity
of our process in knowing sensory objects. For Kant,
rationa.llogic is no longer valid independent of sensation.
Scnsatiion is no longer simply "'confused" thought that
must be reduced to analytic clarity derivable from axioms.
Rather, the sensory given and rational thought are two
different ingredients of any experience.
Kant's Critique of Pure Reason considers axiomatic
thought to be only our human, finite thinking (rather than
world<:onstituting rationality). This fundamentally alters
the whe>le approach (135, 105-106). As human and finite,
our axiomatic thinking is limited to its roles in the make270
WHAT IS A THING?
up of sensory experience. Alone it does not constitute an
object. Thereby, rational metaphysics comes to be seen
as invalid speculation. ·
With Kant (and Heidegger), this valid, limited role
of our thinking has always already occurred whenever
we experience., It is not something we "get from" or "add
to" experience. Thus, the mathematical aspects of nature
are not some grid that we place over what we experience,
but our approach to sensible things. Only with some approach
does one encounter anything. Kant thought only
the Newtonian approach was really basic to human experience;
Reidegger views this as historically variable.
But they agree that things are never experienced except
as some approach has already played its role. Only then
is anything such as "experience" rendered possible, for
experience is always already organized (for example,
laid out, sequential, quantifiable, predictable, and understood
as whatever it is an experience of). We never experience
something totally unrecognizable, unidentifiable,
and out of ·context. Even if we were to have such an experience,
we would identify it by time, place, and what
led up to it. Thus, the Kantian Critique, and Heidegger
too, will do nothing to overthrow those aspects of the
axiomatic method that imply that experience is made
partly by thought. The best example of this is the scientific
experiment.
Heidegger argues that the basic character of modem
science is missed if one says that it differs [rom earlier
science by being experimental. For Heidegger, the fact
that modern science is "experimental" is only another
result of its being basically axiomatic: an experiment is
no mere observing. An experiment in the modem sense
always first sets up a hypothetical framework. We set
up the conditions and procedures in advance; only within
them is nature allowed to answer~ and it can say only yes
or no. It must respond within our framework ( 67-68,
93; 52, 72). (Bacon had said that it is not enough to observe
Analysis 271
nature. We must "torture'' nature and see what then happens
under the circumstances we set up and put into
actio•n. And Kant cites Bacon's point in his Preface.)2
·He~idegger argues that objects in science are made in
a way similar to the way we make tools. (Again. here he
prov:ides the broader, ordinary man-world context within
which science and all else arise.). The use of a tool is
knoV~m in advance and determines the structure we give
it wlilen we invent and make it (71-72, 55). A context of
culture and use is always already implicit when anything
is made. As tools are made, the things of science and the
results of experiments are also made and involve a prior
cultural knowing-a pre.existing context of man and
world-in which the thing is made as (and can then be taken
as) that kind of thing.
Fo1:- the Greeks there was a basic difference between
made· things and things of nature (83, 63). Only natural
things had their own nature and internal origin of motion.
Some:thing artificially made had its being moved only
from the outside, by ·being made. For axiomatic science
all things are only as we mathematically ''make" them.
Later in this analysis we will discuss Heidegger's attemp1ts
to move beyond the current technological situation,
in which nature is something we make. Heidegger
sees vast dangers in it, just as he criticizes the view of
human nature .. art, and life as u things." We have seen that
the thing is made. Will man the maker reduce himself
to an axiomatically made "nature" that can say only yes
or no within a framework set in advance?
Of course this making of nature works only when
nature says "yes" to the framework and apparatus we
dcvis(~ But nature and reality are ••working forces" (93.
72 ). Nature "works" for us within the tertns we pre-set.
Thus. the experimental character of modern science is
:: ". . . constraining nature to give answer to questions of rea·
son's own determining" (B xii-xiii).
272 WHAT IS A THING?
another aspect of its "axiomatic" character: our determining
what things are. As we will :see now. Kant explained
and limited this puzzling fact.
Section B-1 I
Kant accepts the axiomatic character of thought ( 184,
144), as can be seen from his own axiomatic way of proceeding.
He sets up a "system" and derives experience
from the principles he sets up ( 122~ 94-95).
Kant also retains the mathematical approach to experience:
as we still often do, Kant views experience in
terms of units. The mathematical method has been applied
to break things up into sense..c:tata units-felt pressure
sensations, heard bits of sounds, seen color bits,
etc.-s if these were self-subsisting, separate unit~things
(209, 162}. But for Kant these are not experience. Experience
is never had except as it involves much more
than such unit sensations.
For example: I am bit on the arm by a rock. The sensations
are the pressure, the sound thud, and the gray,
etc. However, these sensations occur here (on my left
arm), naw (while the sun is shining), and at a certain,
given, measurable intensity. For Kant. sensations never
occur without being definitely located in space and time,
nor do they occur without a certain intensity.3 It is not
:t These ways in which conceptual aspects participate in experience
to make up objects are ways in which objects become individually
and specifically .. determined'' (186. 202; 146, 157). We
must always see empirically just where and when something occurs,
and with what intensity, and in which necessary explanatory
connections. These specifications determine a specific thing. Any
objective thing is necessarily determined along these 'respects,
and as long as we do not know all these we have not determined
the thing objectively.
Thus, explanatory concepts belong to the determinate character
of any thing, as Leibniz held, but so do space and time locations.
as Newton held.
Lcibniz argued, against Newton's absolute space, that sp-=e is
Analysis 273
possibl,~ to have an experience of pressure such that I
would not know where, or would not as yet know when,
or not yet sense any degree of intensity. Finally, sensations
arc ncvc~r experienced except as connected to other events.
I would not consider it "possible" that I am being hit,
but not by anything related to anything previous {if I
had only this momentary appearance of pressure and a
floating gray shape). If a rock hit me I would wonder
who threw it. Someone "must have." Or it "must have"
fallen flrom somewhere. It "could not" have popped out
of nowhere just in front of my ann. Experience is only
.. possib:le" a$ a tissue of already connected events.
Of course we may not as yet know who threw it, or
only a sy!stem of relations between bodies. Thus. motion is always
only rela;tive. Motion is a change of location, but location for
Leibniz was definable only relative to other bodies and not in an
absolute :space. U this body moves. on~ can just as well say that aU
others m·ove in various ways with respect to it, and it is at rest.
Things an~ real, but space is only their relation.
Newto1ri, however, found that a body ln motion develops centrifugal
force. Yet nothing like tiUs happens to the objects at rest,
although they have motion with respect to the first body.
Thus, an object's spatial location (and change in location,
which iS motion) must somehow be absolute. The space system
must be c:apable of determining wlaich body is in motion, and not
merely the spatial relations between them. In this context it Is
very impcJrtant for Kant to show how spatial location bas a detcnninati
·ve role in making up what the object is. Thus, for Kant,
space and time are not concepts but (as Heidegger put Jt)
"realms" in which anything encounters, or, in Kant's words, the
form of anything sensorily given, i.e., outside us and sequentially.
Kant thus showed both the quantitative idealization aspect of
time and :space, which has a conceptual origin, and the determinative
role that space and time location must play in specifying any
possible sensory object, this one rather than another one like it.
(And tbu~i, too, Leibniz's principle of indiscemibles comes to an
end. precisely because it had been an expression of the limitless
and sole J:IOWer of axiomatic thought without its function in inter·
play with givenness.)
But, fo1· Kant (8136 and 138), the united and uniform quantitative
cbar2LCter of space is fundamentally organized only by the
observer•s. thought connections .. In this latter respect Kant anticipates
Einstein, for whom also the measurer's framework is an
inherent J=l&rt of what space is and how it determines things.
274 WHAT IS A THING?
even if it was a rock. If it looks very strange we may not
yet know what it is. But we know it cannot be just a
"sensory datum .. of grayness and pressure, floating and
unconnected to any other observable events.
Thus, the explanatory connective relations are always
already necessarily involved in any sensory experience,
and even if we do not yet know what they are we Qatly
insist that they are there and that we must study until
we find them.
It may require long and highly specific empirical study
to determine what the object is, i.e., what necessary selations
actually obtain between this sensation and other
sensations. (Say we eventually discover that it is a meteor,
a. leftover bit from a planetary explosion attracted to
Barth by gravitation.) We do not just invent the specific
conceptual relations that explain and tie together the appearances
we sense. But in advance of determining what
a given connection is, we already know and insist that
some necessary objective connections do obtain. The .general
system of necessary relations is set in advance. With·
out it the pressure and gray shape could be purely floating
appearances, but we consider that t
1impossible."' The
necessary relations are objectively there, they are already,
in experience. We work 'Ulltil we discover them speCifically.
Thus, in the scientific approach any experience always
already involves definiteness in spatia-temporal quantitative
and intensity respects, and necessary conceptual
connections between events. The peculiar twist here is
that it is just the conceptual connections (of thought)
that make sensations into objects rather than mere subjective
appearances. ,
This Kantian puzzle is resolved when we realize that
"connections" are not possible without that which they
connect. Therefore, these are valid thought-connections
only as they are the connections of sensory givens. Kant
begins with the interplay. "Experience" is an interplay.
Analysis 27S
Only within it are there a thinker and things. There is no
human su:bject except as a receiver and thinker of experience.
There are no things except as received and
thought in experiencing.
As Heidegger views it, German nineteenth-century
Idealism, although later than Kant, failed to absorb
this insight of ~t's: that the whole experiential interplay
is already involved in anything like a self. Similarly,
Positivism1 failed to absorb Kant's insight: that the experiential
interplay is already involved in anything like
a separate thing. Therefore, in Heidegger's own historical
sequence, Kant comes after German Idealism and Positivism.
(Only as a result of the much later neo-.Kantianism
was Kant understood, says Heidegger (60, 46). It was
one hundred years late (57, 43), 8$ Kant himself pr&
dieted.)
How do conceptual connections function in given sensations?
An "obj•ect" is really sensations. But sensations have
a definite size and duration -in space and time (Categories,
group I) sllld intensity (group II), and Kant calls such
determinate sensations appearances. (Sensations never
actually 4!J)pear any other way.) And, when such determinate
sen:sations are further determined by explanatory
conceptual connections (group III) so that their occurrence
follows from laws, Kant calls such sensations objects.
(As unconnected, such appearances could only be
subjective.) We really see only the gray shape, even when
we see it nc>w and here, so large and as a rock, which must
have been thrown. Thus, objects are sensations, but the
conceptual connectives have always already functioned
in any actual experience.
Kant calls this conceptual tying together of sensations
into objects .. synthesis." But it is only from experience
that we learn what specific connections do obtain between
two events (and what space-time relations and
what intensity obtain). Only tbe framework of the type
276 WHAT IS A THING?
of measures and questions is conceptual. It was in this.
same sense that we said earlier than an experiment poses·.
the hypothetical framework in advance .of the results,
and only within this framework does th~ experiment have
precise results. Only within the framework does it provide
objective, empirical answers.
But such science raises the basic question: In what
way does the given exert control over the specific con·
ceptual connections? Thought steps such as in logic or
counting must be such that sensory givens can control
them! When and why? .
Thus, Kant alters the basic view that until then had·
been held traditionally, concerning what such a thought
step, a "judgment/' is. As had been discussed by Descartes
and LeibniZ, a judgment was only a connection between
two concepts (the subject and the predicate in a sen·
tence). Heidegger's example, ''The board is black" ( 155,
122). A judgment was viewed as a connection between
t;wo concepts, a merely logical step from one to the other •
tying the two. Now Kant shows that there i,s a type of
thought step that connects not only concepts but, irt. the.
same act, connects the grid (''realm," Bereich, manifold)
in which any possible sensations will occur.
Heidegger emphasizes that for Kant the view of judg.,.
ments as mere connections between two concepts ( Sulr
ject and Predicate) is insufficient. KtJnt seeks the sort
of connection between two concepts that simultaneoU$ly
organizes whatever sensory givens can occur. Kant caUs
such a connection ••synthetic."
The question of judgment is now not ,.On what basis
are a subject and a predicate tied together (S-P)?" Ratb.;
er. the question is "How does an S-P tie go to make up
(synthesize) an experience of an object (SP-0)?" It
is not a thought coupled to another thought, but a thought ..
couple coupling all possible sensations, thereby making
an object ( 157, 123 ).
But there are four ways in which synthetic thoughC
Analysis 277
connections work in an experience of objects, These are
the four priilciples, the Kantian demonstrations, which
Heidegger discusses in the last part of the book:
I. F'or Kant, 0 two plus two equals four" is a "syn.
thetic" judgment. By explaining his view on this, we can
best sb.ed light on the first role conceptual connections
play in making up experience ( .. The Axioms of Intuition,"
194, 15.1).
Judg~ments are "analytic'' when the subject already
means 1the predicate. (''Bachelors are unmarried.") What
Descartes said applies to such judgments: One need only
avoid contradiction. Thus, the principle of non-contradiction
is the "top principle of all analytic judgments." But,
in oppcasition to Descartes, Kant holds that the principle
of non-contradiction is not enough (173, 181-182; 135,
142 ). Nlathematics first involv~ a synthesis that is necessary
lfor all experience.
Syntlzetic judgments involve a further step of thought
not givt~n by non-contradiction alone. But the "top principle
of synthetic j\ldgments" involves not merely the
two coDtcepts of this step of thought but also imagination
and the unity "Of the thinker. ''Two plus two/' considered
as men! concept, seems to give enough information to
give us four, and thus seems analytic. But we are concerned
with how the concepts are formed in the first
place, and we are concerned with how, in being formed.
they also synthesize the realm for all objects. In forming
the con•:ept of ''two" and of "four" we must add, count,
and kee'P or unify the steps to form the number. (Simi·
larly, if we imagine drawing a line, we keep what we have
imagined drawing as we draw further, or we would get no
line, onlly momentary bits.) The unity of one activity ol
thought provides the connective union. Kant calls the
.iudgmeJrJt "synthetic" because in the connection of the
steps of counting we generate the continuous quantifiable
grid for aU possible objects. We generate the quantifiable
space ( a1s we draw lines) and the sequence of time (as we
278 WHAT 15 A THING?
count). Space and time are basically those of imagined
drawing and counting units. Hence, the connections be•
tween our steps of thought "synthesize" dte imagined
"schemata" of space and time.
Thus. conceptual connections are involved in the gen~
etation of the contin1,1ous imagined grid of units of_ space
and time, and anything ever sensed or imagined rouse
appear within them.
Because of this synthesis or composition of units, we
can also define the purely analytic relationships ·of th~
concepts. But, for Kant, the synthesis (the making.} ot
concepts always precedes their analytic relationships;
Concept formation precedes the analysis of already
formed concepts. The origin of the ·connections in a con.:.
cept must first be shown. And concept formation mus~
be so accounted for that we can see how the experience!
of object is thereb1 patterned. In this instance we hav~
seen the fonnation of numbers and the thought st,ps o~
counting in such a way that the uniform unit compos~
tion of experience in space and time was also shown. I
Heidegger, too, shows how time, space_. and unit thinare
generated in the interplay between man· and thin~
We are our concerns, fears, and hopes, and, because ware
a projection into the future. we generate time. (Hencd
we must not think of ourselves as "things" present in
time.) For Heidegger, we generate space in the context of
pointing to and distancing objects as over there, plottinll
out a system of orientations in a social interaction witll
others amid things ( 25, 19 ). But the uniform, quantitativ~
grid of si1.e and duration is only one of the ways that con~
nections between conceptual steps also connect experij
etice. Let Us tum to a second. 1
II. Quantitative measurement is applicable. not onl)l!
to space and time locations and durations of sensation~s
but also to their intensity. Kant's "anticipations of pe
ception" (206.160) concern this second and different wa
Analysis 279
Space and time alone, only imagined, make geometry and
arithmetic applicable to anything. Why is degree of intensity
a dlifferent sort of thought connection? Because
something actually sensed must appear. But even before
it appears we know it must have a measurable "intensity."
To color shades, light, intensity, degree of pressure, etc.,
the {conceJ~tual) continuum of degrees and mathematical
measureuu~nt is again applicable. This is the second way
in which connections between concepts also thereby synthesize
a connective continuum for sensory experience.
III. The~ first two have been Kant's "mathematical"
principles. In these the thought steps and connections
are inhereiJit in the sensory appearance itself. In contrast,
the third concerns connections between diflerent occurences
of gil'ens (224, 174). Kant calls the third and fourth
"dynamical!." From something now given we can often
infer that something else must soon happen~ Let us
say we kno,N that the inferred always had happened whenever
this sc•rt of thing first happened. But our sequential
memory alc)ne can,not ensure that it 1nust happen in the
same sequence again. If we do not know why this always
happens wlllen that does, we may well be wrong or we
may have neglected to ~count for some intervening
change. At any rate. we did not yet have the objective
connection. Only if we know vc~hy this makes that happen
can we say that it "must"-' happen again. Thus, explanatory
conce)l·tual connections (just as Descartes said) provide
the objective scientific connections of any possible
appearances.
But, even so, we might be wrong. We are sure only that
the general structure of experience is along these lines.
There is some explanation connecting events. The specific
explanations are constantly discovered. improved,
and extended. They must be found from experience. When
we find tba:tt we were wrong, we find that what we
thought was an "objective" explanation really was not.
280 W 11 AT 1 S A THING?
Thus, we experience "objects" only in terms of necessary
connections between events, i.e., the explanatory relations
we seek.
IV. Finally (236, 183), since experience is possible
only with us, not for objects apart frorri us, what can rational
thought conclude in advance as to what is possible
or impossible? For Kant, God, nature, and man are no
longer subject to the logical laws of rational thought.
Logical possibility is not experiential possibility. Only
that is possible in experience which confonns to the
above three groups of principles (I, II, III). Except as
thought connections also synthesize actual sensory experience.
thought alone is not decisive about what is
possible or impossible.
In these four principles. Heidegger shows that Kant
"demonstrates" the role of each conceptual principle in
experience by a syllogistic sequence. The first (major)
premise tells something that is the case in all ex~rience ..
The second (minor) premise states that this aspect of experience
is possible only as a certain conceptual conneCtion
has already participated. The principle Kant is prov..o
ing then follows by logical neces5ity. But despite this
elegant method of proof, the proofs are all ''circular"·:·
the principle that is concluded (proven) is really merely
shown to have been already involved in the first premise:
In short, the demonstration shows how the principles
are already involved in experience.
This "circle" (224, 241; 174, 187) is of great importance
to Heidegger and lies in the very nature of ontology (the
study of how what is is constituted). Whatever is is always
already patterned in interplay with us before w~
ever make explicit what and how it is. Our "un~rstand~
ing" prestructures everything in those respects we have
outlined. We have always already been involved in any~
thing we have experienced. Our approach has functionec:!
already. To make it explicit is what Kant calls the "tran~
cendental" task. We can show only circularly how we arQ
Analysis 28l
always already involved. The human subject's process
is always already involved implicitly and thought along
with the thing when the thing is approached as a separate
entity O\lLt there. Thus. the roles of thought in synthesizing
what thi1ngs are "leap ahead of" things in Heidegger's way
of putting what Kant called" transcendental." Philosophy
makes explicit how we have already approached and participated.
in the making of the thing (as well as, in the
same process, in the Jllaking of ourselves as selves or subjects
). But such explicating can alter (how we approach)
things. T'herein, Heidegger sees the power of philosophy.
3. HEIDEGGER AND KANT
One reason, among others. that it was necessary to go
so exactly into Kant's approach is.that Heidegger's philosophy
follows Kant's in so many basic ways-with this
difference: Heidegger begins with man in the context of
the ordinary world rather than in the context of science.
This diffeerence gives a very different ring to everything
Heidegge:r says. We will take up here how Kant~s "transcendental''
roles that thought .plays {in what objects
are) become Heidegger's "transcendence"-the way human
beilt1gs' feeling, explication, .language, and action
"sketch" out the world, set up situations, and thereby
partly create what the things are.
Heideg:ger, like Kant, views time's order as generated
by us in our interplay with things. For Heidegger, however,
this· is not the linear time generated by mathematical
thouJP1t but a time generated by the broader human
process of "being-in-the--world," feeling. speaking, and
acting in situations. Hence, it is a time in which the im·
port of the past is being modified by how one i$ now concerned
about what one is about to do.
Just as for Kant the human subject (the "I think" that
provides the synthesizing and steps of thought) is not
282 WUATJSATHING?
itself an object, so for Heidegger the human being is not
a thing, but rather the process of approaching things. A
human person is a being-in and a being-toward, always a
caring for, worrying about, trying to avoid, striving for,
being afraid of, hoping for, etc. Man is this projecting.
(Heidegger calls it the care st.ructure.) I am my being-in
the situations (the sentence I am trying to write, the
point I am getting at, the book I am finishing, the situa:.
Uon I am trying to create, the pitfalls I am trying to avoid.
etc.).
Heidegger insists, as did Kant, that in any experience ot
situation the crucial ways we participate in creating
things and situations have already functioned. Heidegger
points out that apart from our own striving or fearing
there cannot be a situation in the first place. A situation
is not like given things in the room, but Ji.ke my trying to
find something, .or get out, or in, or whatever I am trying
to do there, perhaps what I wish I could and cannot. But
thet·e is no fact that I cannot do it until I first project it
by wanting to do .it, and this implies my purposes. fear5,
or concern.
Kant had shown that even for the things in the room to
be given. thought has already functioned in constituting
and objectively connecting sensations into objects. Thus,
the role Kant assigned to scientific thought Heidegger
assigns to the wider human feeling. living, and thinking.
For Heidegger .. as for Kant, our transcending has always
functioned in advance of (it ''leaps ahead" and helps
create) the facts we experience. But what for Kant was
called .. experience" (the. connected system of experienced
natua·c as a·cndcrcd by science) becomes, for Heidegger,
our always finding ourselves ''thrown" into situations.,
Just as objects involve our "being affected by sensations~
so for Heidegger a situation is my situation because it can
affect me (in terms of affect, feeling, Befindlichkeit ).. Lik~
Kant, Heidegger asserts the partial independence of bo~
the human role and the thing's role. We can define neithe~
Analysis 283
except as the interplay has already functioned, but what
can be done with the things is not at all arbitrary. not
just anything we like.
Kant derived the transcendental principles from "pure
concepts., of the "u,tderstanding" (Verstand) ( 144, 112).
For Helidegger, how human feeling sets up situations is
called "understanding" (Verstehen) and is pre.oeonce~
tual. A <:ontext of meaning is projected by the way we are
rcelingl:y in our situations. (Situations are made by our
concernts in. terms of which they are situations for us.)
With words we can then explicate this "understanding"
of our situations, which was already implicit in our felt
being .. inL situations.
It is am error to consider feeling as. something within
us that could exist without constituting a situation, and
to consider situations as external~ apart from how we feel
our timownness and vulnerability. That view considers
feelings along the thing-model as if they were little things
located "inside" us. My fear is my vulnerability to being
affected in the situation, and it constitutes the threat. The
threat that could materialize or that I could avoid is my
situatio1n. Wbat I feel is not my feeling but my situation.
The situation is not physically defined facts but the significanc'e
and facts created by how I am and could be in
them. T:herefore, Heidegger says that man is his possibilities.
As for Kant, so for Heideggcr: we do not "understand"
rclation.ships that are given in the facts except as we have
already created those facts by how we have already functioned.
And Heidcgger is perfectly deliberate in so using
the word .,understanding" along Kant's lines, as creating
("synthc~tic") things and situations before we can ~
plicate (Kant called it ''analyze-'').. Here, too, and in the
same se:nse. the synthesis of meanings precedes their
analysis.
But, as we have seen, "explication" (Auslegung) for
Hcidegger is not merely conceptual and analytic, but is it·
284 WHAT 1 S A T U J N 0?
self a further creative process. Thus, while the primary
human ~·understanding'' is a feeling process, the further
human processes or explicating in language and thought
arc also 4•constitutive'• of what man is. This means thai
what we are as humans and how we constitute situations
and things is always partly and irreducibly linguistic. We
have seen that Heidegger traces the metaphysical model
of the thing as the 4'bearer of traits" back to· modes of
speech (the subject "bearing" predicates). Our approach
to what is (the thing) was modeled on the nature of the
proposition that, in tum, stems from the context o' pe~
pie's ordinary speaking to e~ch other about facets of their
situation (37, 64, 152-153; 27, 49, I 19). Explication and
speech, as well as felt understanding, project possibilities
and render things along certain lines. They are processes
that transcend, sketch, and thus partly create what things
are. Thus philosophy's power. Language and thought add
their own structures and do not merely draw out the significances
of feeling. They are of a different order. Explication
must be based on what was· already understood in
feeling, but ·''based on" does not mean "equal." Rather,
it means .. hermeneutic," 4l process of further drawing out
and further creating, which, when authentic, expresses
my directly felt "thrownness" and creatively explicates
what I am, i.e., my felt being-in my situations.
In keeping the role Kant gives to "understanding," but
expanding it to be primarily feeling and only then explicative
thought, Heidegger follows Scbleiennacher and
Dilthey. Dilthey had outlined a method of Verstehen in
which one interpreted human products, institutions, and
literary works as expressions of a felt experiential process
that made its own sense. For Dilthcy. mere logic uses
only certain very thin derivatives from the felt continuity
of human experiencing.
Of course for Kant too (and Descartes and others),
logical relationships and logical necessity were derived
from the continuity (Kant called it "'unity") of human
processes as, for example, the unity and continuity of
Analysis 285
the "I think" in counting units and keeping them so as
to corrlpose numbers. But to· Dilthey this meant that
logical relations were extremely thin derivatives from
the br(]tad lived and felt process of experiencing and its
continuity. This continuity was the adaptive and historically
elaborated process of the living human organism
and was first of all felt. It made its own experiential sense
and had its own experiential meanings in its organismic,
structural, and ·functional context.
Thus, to attempt to explain something experiential by
some logical construction was, Cor Dilthey.like explaining
man by one of his own thinnest derivatives. Instead,
Dilthey proposed viewing any human product as patterned
by an experiential process W·ith experiential signifi·
cances. Thus. the felt "understanding" o£ the inquirer
would parallel (and explicatively elaborate verbally) the
.,understanding" implicit in the felt experiential process
itself.
Dilthey, too. was deliberate about the Kaatian use of
uunden;tanding," and saw himself as providing a "critique
of historical reason" to augment Kant's Critique of purely
conceptual reason.
And. for Heidegger, history is always implicit in any
man's ~1ays of feelingly being-in and setting up his situations.
The individual is a creative ., repetition" of historical
meanings in an always already historical context.
I (::an attempt to live from out of my own authentically
felt meanings, but I can do this only by explicating
and elaborating the historically given meanings I actually
already feel and live. Just as we said of philosophy in
Heidegger's view, so also he views the individual as open·
ing up new avenues, but 11nly as he begins by feeling and
explicating that which he already is. Nothing else is authentic.
Nothing else can be creatively elaborated. To
avoid ·what one authentically is leaves one totally alienated
and at the mercy of routines and patterns given by
others. Of course in such avoidance, when one is "fallen·~
into evc:rydayness, one .still has one's desire to maintain
286 WHAT .lS A THING?
this avoiding, but one usually avoids explicating that
as well. Explicating it would be one's most authentic
move and would lead through everydayness bey.ond it.
Therefore, in Sein und Zeit Heidegger begins precisely
with 41everydayness·- and explicates its felt understanding.
One cannot authentically and creatively elaborate
everything, nor would one want to. 1 must choose what
shall be important to me. In some very few chosen respects
1 can attempt to work genuinely, creatively. In
most respects each day 1 will remain more ot loss in
everydayness. Either way 1 stand on and in a historically
produced context and historical meanings.
Not· only the other people of past history but the other
people of now are already an inherent part of what a
person is. One is always a being-with and a being-toward
others, and human situations are not possible without
this. Even being painfully lonely or needing to be alone
is possible for human beings only because being-with is
an inherent aspect of what they are. Chairs and table$
neither feel lonely nor need to be alone.
Thus, Heidegger overcomes Husserl's problem of the
existence of others by ·finding one's living with and toward
others as already part of what it is to be a person. Again,
here he follows Kant .. who overcame the solipsistic problems
left by Berkeley (for example, "Refutation of Idealism,"
8274), by not allowing the existence of subjects
except as they are already a perceiving and thinking of
objects. Heidegger, by widening "understanding" to the
feeling and acting in situations, includes the others as
they are for and to us in situations, that is to say, as humans
whose concerns and cares are part of our sit\Ultions.
Thus, neither they nor I, as selves, are subjective things
inside, but always already a feeling and living·in situa ..
tions, and situations are partly created by our understandings.
Just as Kant's 111 think" is not an object but
partly constitutes objects, so, for Heidegger, people are
not objects but situation-constitutors. My being toward
Analysis 287
others is always already involved in any situation as I find
myself thrown in one."
Thus, both history and my being toward present other
people! arc already involved in the felt understanding
that has functioned to make me what I am, as I am a
being-iin the situations that are authentically situations
for me~.
4. THE LATER HEIDEGGER AND
FU1~URE PHILOSOPHY
Heiclegger's emphasis in later years has been consistent
with his earlier work, but in an important sense he has
added something. He has made very clear exactly in what
new se:nse one ought to interpret his earlier work. There
"' The way in which being~toward others is inherent in wbat a
person i:s cannot be split off from the person•s Jiving among things
(as tho1ugh these were our relations to other people and those
were our relations to things). Rather, anything that encounters us
is already the sort of thing it is (a door or a gun) by virtue of its
having been made along lines of use and purpose by people, both
historically in devising such a thing and ~urrently as the makers
of this lthlnB· We have already seen what Heidegger does Lu the
"understanding," to which Kant gave the role or partly constituting
objects. Heidegger widens it to include human feeling and living.
Hence, lfor Heidegger .. a thing is no longer limited to its being a
body in physics and chemistry, but also includes what it is as a
use-object partly constituted by human situations. But in having
that sort of being, every thing through and through involves the
other pc!Ople who made it and who are implied in it. Even the
things ctf physics are humanly made and imply physicists and
history. although such things involve narrowing the usual experience
to a "mere" observing. We do not usually receive the pure
sense of mere hearing. We do not usually hear 4'a sound"; we hear
u door slamming downstairs. As Heidegger says (209. 162), ordi·
narily e:"periencea things must first be 4'broken up•• into separate
bits of "~ense data.'' and only by this careful and deliberate pre>
cess can w~ then have "~ense data.'' A science that employs carefully
na1rrowed perception and deliberate "mere looking'' (as he
says in Sein tmd Zeit) can have a perfectly legitimate place in
Heidegg•er's view. But, it requires "a very complicated and artful
focus"' (209, 163). It must be recognized as a narrowed focus
within the wider human world and the wider human experiencing,
which involves other people. history. and human making.
288 WHAT IS A THING?
are two ways in which one could interpret all this insistance
that things always already involve our making, defining,
projecting, transcending, approaching. One might
conclude that being is what we make it, what works for
us, what we define and devise. But Heidegger denies precisely
this view of being. A different interpretation is
really intended in all his work: lleidegger has all along
reminded us that what things are is made by our approach,
but being is not the made things. Being is the possible
interaction, a third which is first. It is not the things
we made. Being is t..lae whole context in which such making
and defining can make, define, reveal, and bring forth.
Being is predefined; it is the whole, infinite, as yet undisclosed
richness of all possibilities, of all possible d~
(ining and making.
In this way arises Heidegger's great interest in the preSocratic
philosophers, since they were concerned with
predefined being, "that in which all defined things. come
to be and perish again." It seems to Heidegger that this
was lost with Socrates.
From Plato through Nietzsche, Heidegger sees one con·
tinuous development (wi.th many decisive steps, some
of which he traces in this book). From Plato on. being
is taken as that which is clear, already defined. and constituted.
Being is what is formed and what works. Modem
technology is the ultimate development of this approach.
Heidegger terms the structure posited by technology
;;t "Gestell," which in German combines the meanings of
'
1positing" and "structure,'' and also has the connotation
of an apparatus or a contraption. As we look about us in
the city today. we find ourselves surrounded by man-made
things. by technologically determined routines an<\ views.
There has been a silencing of nature, including our own
nature.
Heidegger sees vast danger in this way of construing
being as something formed and made. That view is idolatry.
It forgets our role in making anything formed. It
misses being and may enslave us to what we have made.
Analysis 289
Not onlly might man blow up the world with technology,
technology has already gone far toward making man its
appendage. making man into a thing whose nature can
say only yes or no within the structuring of technological
projecting. The danger is man (and being) as made!
Both ••undisclosed'' bein.g and man must be grasped
in their roles in the making of anything. "Being needs
man," ~•ays Heidegger in Die Technik und die Kehre. To
''rescue" ourselves from the danger of technology we
must lc•ok precisely there "where the danger is.'• Technology
:shows us not just a few contraptions but a much
larger fact-the interplay. Man is in danger of becoming
somethiing made of man and being. Instead, he must
take hbnself as maker. So viewed, being is not what is
mad,. but that vastly wider sense of being as the not yet
made, ill which we bring forth anything that is made.
Man's approach at a given historical time fs a certain
way, and hence things are a certain way. At another time
the models are different. and so are things. Evidently,
then, b~ing can be defined neither by this nor by that
model c•r approach. Rather. being is this whole condition
in whicln different human approaches can differently determine
what things are.
This is also what Heidegger means by overcoming mctaphysic.
s." We must think beyond any one model. for any
r. Kant had overcome the speculative metaphysics or his time.
He shoWi~d that reason is valid only in its transcendental role of
partly milking e:tperiencc:. Kant was then able to show that apart
from this experiential power the purely rational speculative
schemes could be argued for or against equally well (Kant's
antinom~es),
Kant posited "things in thcmsclv~" ns a limiting notion. We
cannot know anything about things in themselves, for anything
known is related to us. given 1o us. partly made by our reception.
The notie:m of things in themselves ~IIlowed Kant to treat the
things of experience not as lhings in themsel\'es but as partly
involving us. Heidegger puts being in relation to man. but. like
Kant's things in thcmscl\·c.s. being hns no made rorm. It is that
uin which•• is formed anything we participate in forming. But
Heidegger envisions the next development in man as going beyond
chis mere!ly made and as approaching this bt!ing in anotht.o.r wny.
290 WHA"I" IS A THING?
model is still only that same approach that began with
Plato and came to its height with Nietzsche and tech·
nology. A new approach to being is coming, says Heidegger.
What is this new approach to being? He cannot tell
us. It will be the work of an entire culture, not the work
of one man (50, 38).
No philosopher can "jump over his own shadow" ( 150-
151, I 18). Hcidcgger means that no philosopher can jump
over the historical context in which be works and which
he alters. No one can get out of the limits of his own
historical time to deal with the furl her changes that his
own philosophical decisions have made neCesSary. (Only
Hegel did it, but by "jumping into the sun," i.e., beyond
history altogether, to the idea of an absolute end of all
history. But that is purely theoretical. We are always still
within history.)
And so Heidegger cannot jump over his own shadow.
Each of his recent writings ends with his standing at
the edge of an abyss, pointing into the fog of a coming
new approach to what is.
Can we move beyond Heidegger's shadow?
Oil the one hand, we are not to fall back into models,
metaphysics, this or that assumption system, which reo·
dcrs what is as merely these or those created things. On
the other hand, an .,approach" to being, as far as Heideggcr
has gone, always is a model, a framework. a sketching
out of "things," be they similar to our things or different.
Thus, the new approach he envisions poses a dilemma: It
cannot be a new "approach"; it must be a different sort
of thing altogether and. in fact, precisely not just a
"thing."
In the first half of our century (and due partly,to Hei~
degger and others) there has already occurred a fundamental
split between models and concrete Jiving. There
is no longer a "thing," with a single inherent fonn seemingly
of its own, nor does man view himself as having one
given inherent human nature. That is exactly why we
Analysis 291
speak c•f "models" or 41approaches"; these words indicate
variety and relativity. The rigid bodies Newton located
in abso·lute space have given way to Einstein's relativity
to the measurer in physics. The cubists gave us things
not fro.m one but from many simultaneous perspectives.
Pure form without representing anything permitted vast,
wondet'ful, fonnal virtuosities, for example, in art and
in logic and mathematics. Amazing achievements became
possibl•e with the variety that forms could have when
freed from life. Non-Euclidian geometries, modem design,
architec::ture in reinforced concrete, proliferations of
specialized social roles-all these attest to the new power
achieved with forms freed from what had been· thought
to be the constraints of their .,natural" contents.
But \vhereas in the past man had lived and felt him·
self in his roles and definitions, now the relativity and
contradlictions of so many different forms do not permit
that so1rt of inherent identification with a role or form.
We are no longer any of the many roles, values, or forms
of expression. Form split from living leaves living inchoate.
Thus, living humanness has more and more expressed
itself by inchoate protest against reason. against
empty roles and forms. This protest has sometimes been
beautiful and sometimes not.
How shall form (model, construct, "approach") and
man come back together in a new way? It must be a
llelv ·wa.y, since there can no longer be a genuine restoration
of some one model, form, metaphysics, value system,
social role, or artistic style . .,New way" does not mean
the old imposition of some one model, but a method of
using many models, a method of using this human model.
ing pow·er rather than staying within some one model foa·
a century or two •. As I see it, the process of forming must
itseJf be~ the new type of "approach." What has happened
occasionally and some centuries apart must now become
I"Outine for us. It is not this or that model. but the process
of mod€~1-creating itself.
292' W HAT 1 S A T H IN G ?
In modern life, to get through even one day an individual
cannot depend solely on the models and interpretive
patterns he is given by his culture. These contradict,
they are too many, and often they do not solve the situation
in which he finds himself. To deal with what he is up
against they are too few. He mr4st reinterpret, newly interpret,
invent meaning, create myth, and generate new
futures and new significances in order to mold the already
given troubling meanings of his situation.
Recently, Kuhn's analysis0 (highly consistent with Hei"
egger's analyses in this book) has clarified the basic
difference between merely carrying out the implications
of a given scientific model and creating a new one. Kuhn
terms the creation of a new model a "scientific revolution."
I have termed it the creation of meaning.'
The process (or doing) that creates and schemat.izes
cannot itself be explained by some supposedly under}y ..
ing or axiomatic model or scheme. In retrospect one finds
that one's doing has set up a situation that is implicitly
meaningful in ways that can be explicated. Such explication
may look like a logical account of what occurred, but
it is an error to view it as the cause of the process. The explication
is a product of the process. It is a model or
scheme created by the process, and we must see that the
process as concrete doing is prior.
But is not such an approach to being-as the process
of meaning making-really an invitation to arbitrariness?
Is it not merely saying that there are no criteria, that
you can have it any way you like? Anything you say or
do is as good as anything else you might say or do; it all
depends on your interpretation. Existentialism often
a Thomas S. Kuhn, The Strttcture of Scientific R£Volutions (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1962).
T Eugene Gendlin. Experiencing and the Creation of Meaning
(New York: The Free Press, 1962).
Analysis 293
sounds like tha.t ... But this is not at all the case! We know
this from how difficult it is to devise courses of action
and interpretations that take account of all in the situa ..
tion and leave us feeling whole and unconflicted~ That
is why the situation in physics remained unresolved for
so many years, and why Einstein worked for so many
years. That is ,why we so often fail to devise any action
or meaning tha:~.t resolves "hang-ups.'' There are always
plenty of easy alternatives for saying and doing som~
thing that fails, to resolve anything.
To really rest)lve the "hang-ups" is a very different and
far more difficult matter than just picking one or another
of the n1any available schemes and actions that
will not resoJv,e anything. In practice we know the difference
from the ease of one and the difficulty of the
other, from our frequent failure to devise the latter,
and from the unhappily unmistakable consequences of
such failures. 1rhus, the use of this human power of~
fining is anyth:ing but arbitrary, anything but a choice
from ..-nong mtany available alternatives. It is a highly
controlled prot:ess of devising meanings that must take
account. of mo•re facets than have ever yet been formulated.
Existentialistn seemingly places a gap of arbitrariness
between every moment and the next, just because existentialism
denies the logical,. deductive type of continuity.
What sort of ethics, for example, can come from a view
that rejects every statable criterion of value or rightness,
and views it as created by, but not detennining, human
• It is a questicm that besets the method of linguistic analysis
also. The rules fur the use of a word are not in the dictionary;
they are implicit in our knowing bow to speak. One explicates
these rules, not b;y ''leaning on a model," but by leaning directly
on our knowing how to talk and act in situations. Current pbilos.
ophy of both sorts is very much at the juncture at which Heidegger
pictures it. There is a pre-conceptual court of appeal.
294 WHAT IS A THING?
action? Must it not result in high-sounding rationaJiza.
tions for doing absolutely anything one pleases? And,
similarly, how can there be a basis for discussing being or
science if one purports to explicate sorne not fully formulated
14situation"? To say that it cannot be deduced or
checked against a scheme-how is that more than saying
that it must always remain unfounded?
Heidcgger helped fight and win the battle against equating
concrete living with a scheme, won the battle apinst
reading some theoretical scheme into things, and showed
that living humans are the reason for schemes and not
the reverse. Therefore, we must understand the seeming
gap as these oppositions to the earlier rationalistic and
logistic view.
We must reopen the question to which Heidegger's apparent
gap of arbitrariness is the answer. That question
was: Is there some rational or scientific thinglike defined
order that detennines world and man? His answer:
No.
Having seen the question to which Heidegger's "No" is
the answer, we can now separate out a different question
that is too often merged with the fitst. Our second question
is: Are there other criteria, other ways we might
characterize and recognize an authentic, successful inventing
and forming from those many, easily achieved
ways of interpreting, inventing, and forming that seem
to offer solutions but really leave us in pain, in conflict,
sick, or about to embark on something we will later say
we knew better than to do? Even if there is no logical or
rational scheme of things except one that is histQrically
derived and in the process of being changed-by usmight
there be a (nonschcmatic) way of reco~izing
rhe scientific revolution and telling it apart from mere
nonsense or evil?
And. as Hcidegger states so well, further reinterpretations
in Jife or philosophy are possible only on · the
grounds of the ones we are already in, the given ones. We
Analysis 295
cannot genuinely throw away our interpretations, values
and reactions, problems and anomolies, no matter how
emancl·pated we are in general, no matter how convinced
we are in general that our values are "merely relative,"
that science uses "only models." In fact, they are not just
"relativ·e," they are "relative to" the situations in which
they inhere, the problems they helped pose. Unless we
carry alii this further we cannot get out of it. Therefore,
scientieic revolutiQns and everyday problems are so difficult
tc, solve adequately (and $0 easy to avoid or deny
verball~r in obviously futile and merely pained ways).
But i45 there nothing then that can be said to differentiate
the~ authentically experienced, context-inclusive, unconftict•~
manner of meaning-making from an alienated,
inautheintic, merely irresponsible manner of have it what·
ever way you like? In different kinds of situations there
are diff(~rent recognizable marks, some private and some
observable (even in objective research). What basically
sets the! authentic manner of meaning-making apart is
that it 1rnoves from the defined to the as yet undefined
(the felt, concrete sense of the whole situation). and then
from ou;t of that to another. DeW· or modified, more adequate
fo.rm. This movement can apply to anything formed
-thing!;, words, art, ways of acting, or social roles.'
The ntext form is not just another model taking the
place of the first; it is a "zag., in a continuing ,.zig-zag''
o On this and on lhe points made above, the reader may wish
to examirae my other writings: Experie1zcing a~td the Creation of
Meaning (New York: The Free Press, 1962); "Experiential Explication
and Truth." Journal of Existentialism, VI, (1966), 22: "A
Theory of Personality Change,N in Personality Change, ed. by
Worchel a.nd Byrne (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1962); "focusing
Ability in Psychotherapy, Personality and Creativity," in Research
in Psychotherapy. ed. by I. Shlien (Washington .. D.C.:
American Psycbologicat Association, 1967). Vol. Ill: ''What are
the Grounds of Explication?", The Monist, XLIX (1965), 1: '"E~pressive
Meanings,.•• in Invitation to Phenomenology, ed. by J .. Edae
(Chicago: Quadrangle Books. 1965).
296 WHAT IS A THING?
process between one's live sense and the realm of forms.
The next definition can change one's felt sense. To define
a situation alters what one is about. Saying something
in words has an effect on what one wants to say-it
clarifies, intensifies, or shifts it. From such an "experiential
shift" one can move to a further step of forming; one
can suspend any given formulation and turn to the preconceptual,
which always implicitly includes the whole
complexity of which we are sensitive, and which develops
further in interaction, and is carried forward in a zig-zag
that is experientially (though not logically) continuous.
There are a number of different kinds of moving relationships
between forms and concrete experiencing. I
give experiencing the "ing" form because it is activity. In
various distinguishable ways, experiencing lets us create
an endlessly greater variety of relevant forms than the
few rigid ones that culturally given perception and social
roles hold steady for us. This experiential zig-zag movement
is the approach that is more than an approach.
Eugene T. Gendlin
The University of Chicago
INDICES
INDEX OF NAMES
Aristotle, 34, 3Sn., 40, 4S, 49-
50, 78, 80-83, 8S, 106, 108,
112, 116, 118, 132, 1S3, 155,
172
Baliani, Giovanni Battista, 78
Baur.n~en,AJexander, 112-
1S, 117, 121, 1S2, ISS, 213
Bohr, Niels, 20, 67
Descartes, Ren~. 17, 94, 98-
106, 112
Democritus, 79-80, 208
Eberhard, Johann Augustus,
79, 131
Eckhart, Meister, 98
Eddington, Sir Arthur, 13
Eudoxus, 83
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 58
Frederick the Great, 1 12
Galileo Galilei, 66, 79-80, 88,
90-91, 116, 165
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang
von, 58, 113
Gottsched, Johann Christoph,
113
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm, 28,
28n., 58, 113, 132, 134, 150-
51, 191
Heisenberg, Werner, 67
Hume, David, 113
Kant, Immanuel, 5, 34, 5Sff.
Knutzen, Martin, 113
Leibniz, Gottfried W.ilbelm
von, 23-24, 79, 94, 98, 108,
112, 121-22, 150, 166, 174,
191, 199, 235
298
Indices 299
Meier, <k~rg Friedrich, 154-
SS
Newton, Sir Isaac, 7~78, 80,
82, 85-4~8. 91, 94, 97, 126,
165, 199
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 43, 150
Plato, 2, 33, 40, 4.5-46, 49-50,
75,82,91,112,150,208
Protagoras,46
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm
Joseph von, 58, 113, 134, 150
Schiller, Johann Christoph
Friedrich von, 58, 113
Socrates, 73-74
Swirez, Francisco, l 00
Thales, 3
WolJf, Christian von, 78, 87,
112, 152, 154-55, 172
INDEX OF GERMAN TERMS
Abzweckung (purpose), 149
Aktuellen {actual), 44
Anblickbar (capable of being
viewed), 200
Angeschaut (something
looked at), 197
Angeschautsein ( being-intuited),
200
Anmessung (fitting). 35
Ansatz (approach), 28
An-schauen (looking at), 143
anschauen (looking at), 9Sn.;
(intuiting), 198
Ansclzauung (intuition), 135,
197-98
an sich (in itself). 33
Anwesende (present), 63
Anwesenheit (presence), 64,
84
A.ufhebung (being lifted up),
121
Aufkliirung (enlightenment),
124 .
auf-und hingenommen ( takeD
up and in), 142
Auf-und Vorliegendes (exposing
and a present
given), 218
auf uns zu (toward us), 220
augenblicklich (momentary),
218
Ausdruclc (expression), 36
Ausgesaglheit (assertedness),
63
Auskunft ( infonnation ), 36
Aussage (deposition), 37; (assertion),
62
Aussagen an, ''on, Uber (assertions
of, about, to), 36
ausweisen (proven), 180
bedingen (to condition), 8
300
Indices 301
BedingtsE~in (being conditionedh
48
Bedingun~g (condition), 47-
48
Begegnen-lassen~ dlls (the letting
en':ounter), 242
Be griff ( c:oncept), 137
Begriindu:ng (foundation),
14, ss .
Beharren· (enduring), 229
Beistellur.rg (putting-alongside),
1181
Bekundut~g (manifestation),
128
Bericlt.t (1report), 37, ·43
bestilndig (constant), ll7
Bestand (what constitutes),
229
Bestandstucke (permanent
elements), 139, 194
Bestimmu!ngsstiicks (determiRing
·elements), 157
Bewegthe1it (being in motion),
se;
Bewenden! (point). 208
bloss ( me!re), 147
Dafiirhaltcm (taking-for), 92
Dagegensr.,rechen (speak
against, contradict), 107
Da-haben t;having-tbere), 218,
221
Dasein (existence), 41-42,44,
49-SO, 5!5, 65-66, 89, 96-98,
106, 113, 117, 191, 225-29,
235
Daseinstu~;ammenhang (existential
connection), 227
Di,g, das (thing) r 5 I I 5, 128
Dastehen (standing there),
194, 229
Ding an sich (thing-in-itself),
S, 128
Ding fUr uns (thing for us), S
Dinghaftigkeit ( thingness ),
129
Dingheit (thingness), 7, 92
Dingsein (being-a-thing), 19
Dunst (illusion), 214
Ebene (level), 28
Eigenschaften (properties),
34
ein je dieses (one such this
one), 15
ein riiumen (to plac:e space),
200
Eintelnheit (singleness). 49
Empfundene (what is
sensed),137
Entgegen ( againstness ). 158,
204
entgegen-fassendes Vorgreifen
(reaching and grasping
beforehand), 220
Entgegenstehen (standingover-
against), 158
Entgegenstehenlassen ( aJ;.
lowing to stand against),
219
Entscheidung (decision), 9
Entwurf (project), 88-89, 92
Erfahrung (experience), 140;
anschauliche (intuitive direct
experience). 94
Erfahrungsurteil ( experiential
judgment), 139
Erkennbare (the knowable),
137
302 WHAT ISA THING?
Erkennen (knowing), 137
Erlcenntnisse (cognitions),
134
Erklarung (interpretation),
ISS
erliiuternd (clarifying), 164
eroffnet (exposed),242
Erscheirumg (appearance),
128,227
erweiternd (extending), 164
erziihlen (tell), 37
etwas (something), S-6
Faktis (facts), 121
Fe.hlen (privation), 213
Fortwiihren (continuance),
229
Fragestellung (mode of ques·
tioning), 179
Furwort (demonstrative pronoun),
25
Gebung (giving), 143
Gedachte, das (what is
thought), 143
Gefuge (framework), 36
gegen (against), 137, 139-40,
184,195,205,214
Gegenhaft (againstness),
222-23
Gegenhafte-Stlindige, das
(against-like constancy),
219
Gegenheit (againstness)~ 190
Gegenstand (object), 134,
137-40,143,181,184,190,
194, 205, 231, 237
Gegenstiindlichkeit ( objectiVity),
178
Gegenstehen (standing be-fore),
188
Gegenstehenlassen (permitting
a standing-against),
205,241
Gegen-uns-stehenden C what
stands-over-against-us), 202
Geistigen (spiritual), 51
Gemiichte (product), 244
Gemeinsamkeit (sharing ip
common), 136
geriihrt (stirred), 143
Gesammelrheit (collectedness),
203
Geschehen (happening), 48
Geschichte (history), 45
Geschiclztlichkeit (historicity).
39
Gren:.tiehung (laying of
limits), 120
GrO.sse (magnitude), 195
Grossenmass (measure of
size), 215
Grosshafte (sizeable), 195
Gr&md (basis), 83; (principle),
148
Grundriss (blueprint), 91-92
Grundsiitte (axioms), 124;
(real principles), 193
H ervorgelrens (emergence),
83
Hinausgrifl (grasping-out),
221
Hina1.1s-z.u (out-to), 199
Hin-nehmen (taking-in), 142
lchheit (1-ness), 105
ldentitiiten (identities). 174
Indices 303
im vorhine~in (in advance),
221
ln-der-Zeil.'-sein (being-intime),
2:~3
in,nitten des Seienden {in the
midst of what is), SO
/nsichgesammelt (what is
collected in itself). 188
lnsichsteh.ende (what stands
in itself)·, 188
je diese (just these),lS-18,.23
ie diese Di:nge (these things),
15
je dieses (this one), 15-18,
23-24,28.
Jediesheit 1(being-this-one),
14-15
je fiir sich ('each-for-itself), 15
Jenseitige (ulterior), 25
jeweillg (particulat}, 30
Jeweiligkeit (particularity),
16
Kategorien.lehre (theory of
categories), 64
tedig (unen.cumbered), 147
Leitfaden (,guideline), 64
Lichtung (illumination), 106
Logistic ( S)rmbolic logic), 156
Mannig{alagkeit (manifoldness),
208
Menge (agg:regate), 195;
(multiplicity), 204
Mit-datu-vo:rstellen ( additional
rep•resentation ), 163
mitgesagt (1co-ass~rted), 63
Mitteilung (communication),
36
Mogtichkeit (possibility), 21
Natilrding (natural thing),
127
natiirliche Welt-ansicht (natural
world-view), 40
neben (beside>. 198
N ebeneiPUJnder (proximity),
198
Nichtauseinanderfahrende
(what does not fall apart),
188
Objekt (object), 134, 139-40,
237 .
Offenbare, das (what is ll18Jl4
ifes~), 141
Offene (open), 242
Ort (place), 16
phynologisch ( physiological),
126
Pr4Senz(presence),188
Prlnt.ip (principle), 124, 193
Prioriti.it (priority), 165
R4wn1urfte (the spatial), 196
Raum-Zeit-Bet.ug (spacetime-
relation), 19
Raum-Zeit-Stelle (spacetime-
position), 19
Reali tat (reality), 239
Richtigkeit (correctness). 45
Ruck (jolt), 2
RUckbesinnung (reflecting
back).207
Ruck-wurf (thrown back),
243
304 WHAT IS A THING?
Ruhe (quiescence}, 44
Sache (fact)~ 126, 138i (a
something), 212
Sachhaft (thingUke). 214
Sacl1haltig (belonging to the
content of). 239-40
Sachhaltigkeit (character),
233: (content), 240
Sachheit (something), 219;
( thinghood ). 213. 237
.t;achlich Vorgangige. das
(what objectivily precedes),
166
Sammlung (gathering-together),
187
Satt (proposition), 36, 193
Satvzussage (assertion). 38
Satzgegenstand (object of a
Proposition), 38
Salt vom Grund (principle of
sufficient reason), 108
Schauen (looking), 143
Schein (semblance), 12, 194,
214
schon Anwesende, das (the
already present), 63
Seiender (one that is), 142
Sein des Seienden (the being
of what is), 17!
Seinsbestimmung (determination
of being), 63
seinsmiissige H erkunft ( ori·
gin considered in terms of
its mode of being), lOS
Sich-Aussprechen (to declare
oneself)_. 36
sich-im-Geiste-denken (to
think in the mind), 91
Sich·richten (a directing-to),
35
Sich-selbst-eine-Kenntnis
geben (giving-oneself-acognition),
91
Sich-zeigendes (what shows
itself). 188, 200
Sinntichkeit (sensibility), 143
sondem (to sort). 119
Spielraum (domain), 92
Spruch (saying), 171
Stammbegriffe (root con ..
cepts), 187
Stand (standing), 184, 190,
205
Stiindigkeit (constancy), 229,
231
Stoffding (material thing), 51
Stofflichkeit (materiality),
213
Strecke (stretch), 56
Tatsachen (facts), 59
Trager (bearer), 34, 3Sn~
Tun (doing), 207
Vbereinstimm,mg ( correspondence),
36
uberspringen (pass over, skip
over), 8, 93, 151
Vberstieg (passing over), 176
Vber-weg (passing beyond),
176
umganglich alltiiglich Gegebene,
das (the us~ every·
day given), 211
U tn-ut3s·11erunt ( round·about'!'
us), 7
Unbedingt (unconditioned),
9.47
Indices 305
unheimlicher (more uncanny),
44
unseiend (non-existent), 240
Unterlag.e (foundation), 34
Veriinde1-ung (alteration),
234
verbesstwn (reform), 10
Verbinden (connecting). 203
Verbindu~ngswort (connective),
38
Vergegensti:i.ndlicltung ( objecti&
C4ation), 141
Vernunft (reason), 64
verrilcktf!S (.deranged), 2
Verruckung (shifting),. 2
VerschwE~igung (concealment),
37
Verwandtschaft (relation),
136
Vorausgr•rfl (anticipation), 92
Voraus-vc•r-stellung (presenting--
in-advance ). 230
vordeute,rde Erlliuterung
(preliminary elucidation),
61
VordeutUJJtg (interpretation),
128
vor-gebildet (pre-formed),
201
vor-gefuncien (found in advance),
137
vor-gehall en (held-before),
200
Vorgreife.n. (beforehand),
220
Vor-griff (reaching-before),
243
Vorgriff (llnticipation ), 243
Vorhalt (presentation), 218
Vorhanden (the present-athand),
5, 11, 35, 52, 105, 199;
(existing), 34
Vorhandensein (being-present-
at-hand), 225
Vorherige, das (the preceding),
166, 168
Vorriss (outline), 121
Vor·stellen (pre-senting,. representing),
200, 224
vor-stellend (pre-senting),
189
Vorstellung (conception), 32;
(representation), 130, 136
Vor-"ns-kommen (comingbefore-
us), 195
Vor-urteile (pre-judgments),
180
Wahrgenommene (what is
perceived). 137
~ahrhaft (tnue),l81
Wahrndrmungsurteil (perceptual
judgment), 139
Was (what), 210, 213
Wasgehalt (what<ontent),
212,214
was ist seiender (what more
truly is), 210
·w as-seiendes (being-what).
222
Wechsel(change),234
W eg (path), SS-56
werfen (throw), 89n.
Wesensbau (essential structure),
36
W esens&~mgrenz.ung (essentiaJ
delineation), 161
wirklich (actual). 191
306 WHAT IS A THING?
Wirklichkeit (actuality), 191,
239
wirkt (being effective), 191
Wissenschllften. (sciences), 1
Womit (wherewith), 189
Worinnen (wherein), 194
WUrdigen (evaluation), 92
wii.rdigt (evaluated), 92
Zeichen (signs), 56
Zeitpunkte (time point), 21
Zeitraum (tim~span}, 16-17
ZeitsteUen (time-spots), 233
Zensur(censor),121
Zeugraum (equipment
room), 21
zu-fallen (to occur in addition),
235
Zug (characteristic), 18
zu-gesagt (said of), 62: (attributed
to), 63
zugleich (at the same time),
172
Zugrundeliegendes (something
which underlies), 105
Zu-sagen (attribution), 62
Zusammen (together), 186;
(togetberness),226
Zusammensetzen (putting-together),
186
Zweifalt (doubleness), 135
Zwischen (the between), 242
INDEX OF LATIN TERMs
accidens ( uccident), 34
actus men.tis (action of the
mind), 1!58
adaequatio (correspondence),
117
animal rationale (rational
animal), 106
axiomata sive leges motus
(principles or laws of motion
), 77, 92
cogito (I think), 98, 104,
106-7
cognitio hu1tzamz (what is
knowable by man's pure
reason), ll16
commensuratio (fitting), 117
complemenitum possibilitatis
( complernent to possibility),
239
compositio (composition),
225
coniunctio ( conj\Dlction ),
225
convenientia (agreement),
117
copula (bond), 156
cosmologia rationalis ( rational
cosmology), 110
determinatio (determinateness),
213
dynamis (force), 191
ens commune (things in general),
118
ens creatum (created thing),
47,110
esse,tia (essence), 212
e.xistentia (existence), 213,
239
307
308 WHAT IS A THING?
experientia (experience)J 93
experiri (to experience), 93
fundamentum (basis,
ground), 104
fundamentum absolutum
(absolute ground), 103
hie (this here), 24
ille (that far away), 25
inconcussum (unshakable),
103
isle (that there), 24
iudicium (judgment), 154
lex inertiae (law of inertia),
78
mathematica universalis
(universal mathematics),
101
mathematica vulgaris (common
mathematics), 101
mathesis universalis ( universal
teacfUng), 102
mente concipere (to conceive
in the mind), 91-92,
116
metaphysica architectonica -(
architectonic metaphysics),
121
metaphysica generalis ( general
metaphysics), 111
metaphysica specialis ( spe-cialized
metaphysics), 111
moto corporum, de (on the
motion of bodies), 78
mundi systemate, de (on the
system of the world), 78
systema mundi (system Irlf
the world), 126 f!J ,
theologia rationalis (ratio '
theology), 109
transcendere (to pass over), f
178
tribuere (to attribute), 154
tueor (to look, gaze), 95n.
veritas (truth), 117
vis centripeta (centripetal
force), 77
vis impressa (impacted
force), 88
INDBX oF GR.BBK TEaMs
a.'lafr,tnrr (the sensible) I 113:
(sensibility, perception)~
144
aA:IJicra (trutiJL), 46
ap.a. (at the same time), 172
&.vn»vvp.la. ( prctnoun ), 25
~&&.. (evaluate), 92
~,,:,p.a.Ta. ( ftmdamental propositions,
axioms), 92
uAGl (simple movements), 84
rl~, (holding away), 154
d.pxrj ( beginnb1g) 1 83: ·~
'"+cw' (beginning of motion),
83
flit- (by violen•~). 84, 88
&a.lpcm~ ( takir1g apart, analysis),
160
BWa.J&L' (force, power, capacity),
85
hrct (that far away, there), 2S
·~~1(knowledge),81
~tall a.~ (according to them·
selves),83
~eo81Mov (in general, on the
whole), 117
~ea.f'CL (from above to below),
62
~ea.nl~m.~ (assertion, attribution),
62, 107, 154
"a.rrrtoplo. (category), 63
""""''l J,B,&a (motion in a
straight line), 84
ltiVIJf7''l Ka.Ta TOnv (motion with
respect to location), 83
ttplvcw (to sort, separate), 119
~""' (in a circle), 84
'Alye.&v (to address, assert as
something), 64
309
